



procon                                                           R. Salz
Internet-Draft                                       Akamai Technologies
Obsoletes: 2026, 5657, 6410, 7100, 7127, 8789,                S. Bradner
           9282 (if approved)               Harvard University (retired)
Updates: 7475 (if approved)                                 29 July 2026
Intended status: Best Current Practice                                  
Expires: 30 January 2027


                     The Internet Standards Process
                    draft-ietf-procon-2026bis-latest

Abstract

   This memo documents the process used by the Internet community for
   the standardization of protocols and procedures.  It defines the
   stages in the standardization process, the requirements for moving a
   document between stages, and the types of documents used during this
   process.  It also addresses the intellectual property rights and
   copyright issues associated with the standards process.

   This document obsoletes RFC 2026, RFC 5657, RFC 6410, RFC 7100, RFC
   7127, RFC 8789, and RFC 9282.  It also includes the changes from RFC
   7475.  If this document and [_2418bis] are published as RFCs, then
   taken together the two of them make RFC 7475 obsolete.

About This Document

   This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.

   Status information for this document may be found at
   https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-ietf-procon-2026bis/.

   Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
   https://github.com/ietf-wg-procon/2026bis.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 30 January 2027.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2026 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction
     1.1.  Terminology
   2.  Creating an Internet Standard
     2.1.  Intellectual Property Requirements
   3.  Organization of This Document
   4.  Documents related to Internet Standards
     4.1.  Requests for Comments (RFCs)
     4.2.  Internet-Drafts
   5.  Internet Standard Specifications
     5.1.  Technical Specification
     5.2.  Applicability Statement
     5.3.  Requirement Levels
   6.  The Internet Standards Track
     6.1.  Standards Track Maturity Levels
       6.1.1.  Proposed Standard
       6.1.2.  Internet Standard
     6.2.  Non-Standards Track Maturity Levels
       6.2.1.  Experimental
       6.2.2.  Informational
       6.2.3.  Procedures for Experimental and Informational RFCs
       6.2.4.  Historic
   7.  Best Current Practice (BCP) RFCs
     7.1.  BCP Review Process
   8.  Standards Actions
     8.1.  Initiation of Action
     8.2.  IESG Review and Approval
     8.3.  Publication
     8.4.  Advancing in the Standards Track
     8.5.  Revising a Standard
     8.6.  Retiring a Standard
     8.7.  Conflict Resolution and Appeals
       8.7.1.  Working Group Disputes
       8.7.2.  Process Failures
       8.7.3.  Questions of Applicable Procedure
       8.7.4.  Appeals Procedure
   9.  External Standards and Specifications
     9.1.  Use of External Specifications
       9.1.1.  Incorporation of an Open Standard
       9.1.2.  Incorporation of Other Specifications
       9.1.3.  Assumption
   10. Notices and Record Keeping
   11. Varying the Process
     11.1.  The Variance Procedure
     11.2.  Exclusions
   12. Security Considerations
   13. IANA Considerations
   14. Change Log
     14.1.  Working group draft
     14.2.  Individual draft
   15. References
     15.1.  Normative References
     15.2.  Informative References
   Acknowledgments
   Authors' Addresses

1.  Introduction

   This memo documents the process currently used by the Internet
   community for the standardization of protocols and procedures.  The
   Internet Standards process is organized and managed by the IETF, an
   entity of the Internet Society (ISOC); see [RFC8712].

   The Internet, a loosely-organized international collaboration of
   autonomous, interconnected networks, supports host-to-host
   communication through voluntary adherence to open protocols and
   procedures defined by Internet Standards.  There are also many
   isolated interconnected networks, which are not connected to the
   global Internet but use the Internet Standards.

   The Internet Standards Process described in this document is
   concerned with all protocols, procedures, and conventions that are
   used in or by the Internet, whether or not they are part of the TCP/
   IP protocol suite.  In the case of protocols developed and/or
   standardized by non-Internet organizations, however, the Internet
   Standards Process normally applies to the application of the protocol
   or procedure in the Internet context, not to the specification of the
   protocol itself.

   In general, an Internet Standard is a specification that is stable
   and well-understood, is technically competent, has multiple,
   independent, and interoperable implementations with substantial
   operational experience, enjoys significant public support, and is
   recognizably useful in some or all parts of the Internet.

1.1.  Terminology

   Readers are expected to be familiar with the various entities
   involved in the Internet Standards Process, as described in
   [RFC9281].

2.  Creating an Internet Standard

   A specification undergoes a period of development and several
   iterations of review by the Internet community and revision based
   upon experience, is then adopted as a Standard by the appropriate
   body (see below), and is published.  In practice, the process is more
   complicated, due to (1) the difficulty of creating specifications of
   high technical quality; (2) the need to consider the interests of all
   of the affected parties; (3) the importance of establishing
   widespread community consensus; and (4) the difficulty of evaluating
   the utility of a particular specification for the Internet community.

   The process described here only applies to the IETF RFC stream.  See
   [RFC4844] for the definition of the streams and [RFC5742] for a
   description of the IESG responsibilities related to those streams.

   The goals of the Internet Standards Process are:

   *  Technical excellence;

   *  Prior implementation and testing;

   *  Clear, concise, and easily-understood documentation;

   *  Openness and fairness; and

   *  Timeliness

   The procedures described in this document are designed to be fair,
   open, and objective; to reflect existing (proven) practice; and to be
   flexible.

   *  These procedures are intended to provide a fair, open, and
      objective basis for developing, evaluating, and adopting Internet
      Standards.  They provide ample opportunity for participation and
      comment by all interested parties.  At each stage of the
      standardization process, a specification is repeatedly discussed
      and its merits debated in open meetings, public electronic mail
      lists, and/or other electronic fora, and it is made available for
      review via world-wide on-line directories.

   *  These procedures are explicitly aimed at recognizing and adopting
      generally-accepted practices.  Thus, a candidate specification
      must be implemented and tested for correct operation and
      interoperability by multiple independent parties and utilized in
      increasingly demanding environments, before it can be adopted as
      an Internet Standard.

   *  These procedures provide a great deal of flexibility to adapt to
      the wide variety of circumstances that occur in the
      standardization process.  Experience has shown this flexibility to
      be vital in achieving the goals listed above.

   The goal of technical competence, the requirement for prior
   implementation and testing, and the need to allow all interested
   parties to comment all require significant time and effort.  On the
   other hand, today's rapid development of networking technology
   demands timely development of standards.  The Internet Standards
   Process is intended to balance these conflicting goals.  The process
   is believed to be as short and simple as possible without sacrificing
   technical excellence, thorough testing before adoption of a standard,
   or openness and fairness.

   From its inception, the Internet has been, and is expected to remain,
   an evolving system whose participants regularly factor new
   requirements and technology into its design and implementation.
   Users of the Internet and providers of the equipment, software, and
   services that support it should anticipate and embrace this evolution
   as a major tenet of Internet philosophy.

   The procedures described in this document are the result of a number
   of years of evolution, driven both by the needs of the growing and
   increasingly diverse Internet community, and by experience.

2.1.  Intellectual Property Requirements

   All documents used in the Internet Standards Process must meet the
   conditions specified in [BCP78] and [BCP79].

3.  Organization of This Document

   Section 4 describes the publications and archives of the Internet
   Standards Process.  Section 5 describes the types of Internet
   standard specifications.  Section 6 describes the Internet standards
   specifications track.  Section 7 describes Best Current Practice
   RFCs.  Section 8 describes the process and rules for Internet
   standardization.  Section 9 specifies the way in which externally-
   sponsored specifications and practices, developed and controlled by
   other standards bodies or by others, are handled within the Internet
   Standards Process.  Section 10 describes the requirements for notices
   and record keeping, and Section 11 defines a variance process to
   allow one-time exceptions to some of the requirements in this
   document.

4.  Documents related to Internet Standards

4.1.  Requests for Comments (RFCs)

   Each distinct version of an Internet Standards specification is
   published as an RFC on the IETF stream.  RFCs can be obtained from a
   number of Internet hosts using standard Internet applications such as
   the WWW.

   RFCs cover a wide range of topics in addition to Internet Standards,
   from early discussion of new research concepts to status memos about
   the Internet.  For information about the input format, style guide,
   and supported output formats see https://www.rfc-editor.org
   (https://www.rfc-editor.org).

   Some RFCs document an "Internet Standard."  These RFCs form the "STD"
   subseries of the RFC series [RFC1311].  When a specification has been
   adopted as an Internet Standard, it is given the additional label
   "STD xxx" (see Section 6.1.2).

   Some RFCs standardize the results of community deliberations about
   statements of principle or conclusions about what is the best way to
   perform some operations or IETF processes.  These RFCs form Best
   Current Practice (BCP) subseries.  When a specification has been
   adopted as a BCP, it is given the additional label "BCP xxx" (see
   Section 7).

   Each entry in the STD or BCP subseries may have more than one RFC.

   Not all specifications of protocols or services for the Internet
   should or will become Internet Standards or BCPs.  Such non-standards
   track specifications are not subject to the rules for Internet
   standardization.  Non-standards track specifications may be published
   as "Experimental" or "Informational" RFCs; see Section 6.2.

   In addition, not all RFCs are standards track documents, and not all
   standards track documents reach the level of Internet Standard.  In
   the same way, not all RFCs which describe current practices have been
   given the review and approval to become BCPs.  See [RFC1796] for
   further information.

   The full list of all RFCs, including the subseries, and lists
   organized by status, can be found at [RFCED].

4.2.  Internet-Drafts

   During the development of a specification, draft versions of the
   document are made available to the public for review and comment by
   placing them in the Internet-Drafts collection.  This makes an
   evolving working document readily available to a wide audience,
   facilitating the process of review and revision.

   A Internet-Draft that has been not been changed for more than six
   months will be marked as Expired and may be removed from some views
   of the collection.  At any time, an Internet-Draft may be replaced by
   a more recent version of the same specification, restarting the six-
   month timeout period.

   The format of an Internet-Draft is mostly the same as for an RFC.
   Full details, including the naming conventions and required contents,
   can be found at [RFCED].  Of particular importance is the legal
   boilerplate and copyright as described in the "Copyright Notice"
   section of https://authors.ietf.org/en/required-content
   (https://authors.ietf.org/en/required-content).

   Internet-Drafts have no formal status, and are subject to change or
   removal at any time.  They are working documents and have no official
   standards status whatsoever.  They may, eventually, turn into a
   standards-track document or they may sink from sight.  An Internet-
   Draft is not a means of "publishing" a specification; specifications
   are published through the RFC mechanism described in the previous
   section.

   It is acceptable to reference an Internet-Draft that may reasonably
   be expected to be published as an RFC using the phrase "Work in
   Progress".  This may also be done in a standards track document
   itself as long as the specification in which the reference is made
   would stand as a complete and understandable document with or without
   the reference to the "Work in Progress".

5.  Internet Standard Specifications

   Specifications subject to the Internet Standards Process fall into
   one of two categories: Technical Specification (TS) and Applicability
   Statement (AS).

5.1.  Technical Specification

   A Technical Specification is any description of a protocol, service,
   procedure, convention, or format.  It may completely describe all of
   the relevant aspects of its subject, or it may leave one or more
   parameters or options unspecified.  A TS may be completely self-
   contained, or it may incorporate material from other specifications
   by reference to other documents (which might or might not be Internet
   Standards).

   A TS shall include a statement of its scope and the general intent
   for its use (domain of applicability).  Thus, a TS that is inherently
   specific to a particular context shall contain a statement to that
   effect.  However, a TS does not specify requirements for its use
   within the Internet; these requirements, which depend on the
   particular context in which the TS is incorporated by different
   system configurations, are defined by an Applicability Statement.

5.2.  Applicability Statement

   An Applicability Statement specifies how, and under what
   circumstances, one or more TSs may be applied to support a particular
   Internet capability.  An AS may specify uses for TSs that are not
   Internet Standards, as discussed in Section 9.

   An AS identifies the relevant TSs and the specific way in which they
   are to be combined, and may also specify particular values or ranges
   of TS parameters or subfunctions of a TS protocol that must be
   implemented.  An AS also specifies the circumstances in which the use
   of a particular TS is required, recommended, or elective (see
   Section 5.3).

   An AS may describe particular methods of using a TS in a restricted
   "domain of applicability", such as Internet routers, terminal
   servers, Internet systems that interface to Ethernets, or datagram-
   based database servers.

   The broadest type of AS is a comprehensive conformance specification,
   commonly called a "requirements document", for a particular class of
   Internet systems, such as Internet routers or Internet hosts.

   An AS may not have a higher maturity level in the standards track
   than any standards-track TS on which the AS relies (see Section 6.1).

5.3.  Requirement Levels

   An AS shall apply one of the following "requirement levels" to each
   of the TSs to which it refers:

   *  Required: Implementation of the referenced TS, as specified by the
      AS, is required to achieve minimal conformance.  For example, IP
      and ICMP must be implemented by all Internet systems using the
      TCP/IP Protocol Suite.

   *  Recommended: Implementation of the referenced TS is not required
      for minimal conformance, but experience and/or generally accepted
      technical wisdom suggest its desirability in the domain of
      applicability of the AS.  Vendors are strongly encouraged to
      include the functions, features, and protocols of Recommended TSs
      in their products, and should omit them only if the omission is
      justified by some special circumstance.  For example, the TELNET
      protocol should be implemented by all systems that would benefit
      from remote access.

   *  Elective or Optional: Implementation of the referenced TS is not
      mandatory within the domain of applicability of the AS; that is,
      the AS creates no explicit necessity to apply the TS.  However, a
      particular vendor may decide to implement it, or a particular user
      may decide that it is a necessity in a specific environment.

   As noted in Section 6.1, there are TSs that are not in the standards
   track or that have been retired from the standards track, and are
   therefore not required, recommended, or elective.  Two additional
   "requirement level" designations are available for these TSs:

   *  Limited Use: The TS is considered to be appropriate for use only
      in limited or unique circumstances.  For example, the usage of a
      protocol with the "Experimental" designation should generally be
      limited to those actively involved with the experiment.

   *  Not Recommended: A TS that is considered to be inappropriate for
      general use is labeled "Not Recommended".  This may be because of
      its limited functionality, specialized nature, or historic status.

   Although TSs and ASs are conceptually separate, in practice a
   standards-track document may combine an AS and one or more related
   TSs.  For example, Technical Specifications that are developed
   specifically and exclusively for some particular domain of
   applicability, e.g., for mail server hosts, often contain within a
   single specification all of the relevant AS and TS information.  In
   such cases, no useful purpose would be served by deliberately
   distributing the information among several documents just to preserve
   the formal AS/TS distinction.  However, a TS that is likely to apply
   to more than one domain of applicability should be developed in a
   modular fashion, to facilitate its incorporation by multiple ASs.

6.  The Internet Standards Track

   Specifications that are intended to become Internet Standards evolve
   through a set of maturity levels known as the "standards track".
   These maturity levels -- "Proposed Standard" and "Internet Standard"
   -- are defined and discussed in Section 6.1.  The way in which
   specifications move along the standards track is described in
   Section 8.

   There used to be a status that came between Proposed Standard and
   Internet Standard called "Draft Standard."  As of the writing of this
   document, there still exist some RFCs at that status.  Documents at
   Draft Standard may be advanced to Internet Standard, either via the
   procedure described in Section 8 (if they meet the requirements of
   Section 6.1.1) or with the consent of the IESG.  The IESG may also
   decide to remove the Draft Standard status from a document and mark
   it as either Historic or Proposed Standard.

   Even after a specification has been adopted as an Internet Standard,
   further evolution often occurs based on experience and the
   recognition of new requirements.  The nomenclature and procedures of
   Internet standardization provide for the replacement of old Internet
   Standards with new ones, and the assignment of descriptive labels to
   indicate the status of "retired" Internet Standards.  A set of
   maturity levels is defined in Section 6.2 to cover these and other
   specifications that are not considered to be on the standards track.

   Standards track specifications normally must not depend on either
   other standards track specifications which are at a lower maturity
   level or on non standards track specifications other than referenced
   specifications from other standards bodies (see [BCP97] and
   Section 9).

6.1.  Standards Track Maturity Levels

   Internet specifications go through stages of development, testing,
   and acceptance.  Within the Internet Standards Process, these stages
   are formally labeled "maturity levels".

   This section describes the maturity levels and the expected
   characteristics of specifications at each level.

   A "standards action" -- entering a particular specification into,
   advancing it within, or removing it from, the standards track -- must
   be approved by the IESG.

6.1.1.  Proposed Standard

   The entry-level maturity for the standards track is "Proposed
   Standard."  A specific action by the IESG is required to move a
   specification onto the standards track at the "Proposed Standard"
   level.

   A Proposed Standard specification is stable, has resolved known
   design choices, has received significant community review, and
   appears to enjoy enough community interest to be considered valuable.

   Usually, neither implementation nor operational experience is
   required for the designation of a specification as a Proposed
   Standard.  However, such experience is highly desirable and will
   usually represent a strong argument in favor of a Proposed Standard
   designation.

   The IESG may require implementation and/or operational experience
   prior to granting Proposed Standard status to a specification that
   materially affects the core Internet protocols or that specifies
   behavior that may have significant operational impact on the
   Internet.

   A Proposed Standard will have no known technical omissions with
   respect to the requirements placed upon it.  Proposed Standards are
   of such quality that implementations can be deployed in the Internet.
   However, as with all technical specifications, Proposed Standards may
   be revised if problems are found or better solutions are identified,
   when experiences with deploying implementations of such technologies
   at scale is gathered.

   Notwithstanding the previous paragraph, the IETF may occasionally
   choose to publish as Proposed Standard a document that contains areas
   of known limitations or challenges.  In such cases, any known issues
   with the document will be clearly and prominently communicated in the
   document, for example, in the abstract, the introduction, or a
   separate section or statement.

6.1.2.  Internet Standard

   A specification for which significant implementation and successful
   operational experience has been obtained may be elevated to the
   Internet Standard level.  An Internet Standard is characterized by a
   high degree of technical maturity and by a generally held belief that
   the specified protocol or service provides significant benefit to the
   Internet community.

   A specification that reaches the status of Internet Standard is
   assigned a number in the STD subseries.

6.2.  Non-Standards Track Maturity Levels

   Not every specification is on the standards track.  A specification
   may not be intended to be an Internet Standard, or it may be intended
   for eventual standardization but not yet ready to enter the standards
   track.  A specification may have been superseded by a more recent
   Internet Standard, or have otherwise fallen into disuse or disfavor.

   Specifications that are not on the standards track are labeled with
   one of three "off-track" maturity levels: "Experimental,"
   "Informational," or "Historic."  The documents bearing these labels
   are not Internet Standards in any sense, but they must also be
   approved by the IESG.

6.2.1.  Experimental

   The "Experimental" designation typically denotes a specification that
   is part of some research or development effort.  Such a specification
   is published for the general information of the Internet technical
   community and as an archival record of the work.

6.2.2.  Informational

   An "Informational" specification is published for the general
   information of the Internet community.  The Informational designation
   is intended to provide for the timely publication of a very broad
   range of responsible informational documents from many sources.

6.2.3.  Procedures for Experimental and Informational RFCs

   Documents with the Experimental or Informational maturity level may
   be published using the process and workflow described here.
   Documents proposed for Experimental and Informational RFCs by IETF
   Working Groups [_2418bis] go through IESG review.  The review is
   initiated using the process described in Section 8.1.

   The final assignment of maturity level, as with Internet Standards
   Track Documents, is determined by the IESG.

6.2.4.  Historic

   A specification that has been superseded by a more recent
   specification or is for any other reason considered to be obsolete is
   assigned to the "Historic" level.  (Purists have suggested that the
   word should be "Historical"; however, at this point the use of
   "Historic" is historical.)

7.  Best Current Practice (BCP) RFCs

   The BCP subseries of the RFC series is designed to be a way to
   standardize practices and the results of community deliberations.  A
   BCP document is subject to the same basic set of procedures as
   standards track documents and thus is a vehicle by which the IETF
   community can define and ratify the community's best current thinking
   on a statement of principle or on what is believed to be the best way
   to perform some operations.

   Historically Internet Standards have generally been concerned with
   the technical specifications for hardware and software required for
   computer communication across interconnected networks.  However,
   since the Internet itself is composed of networks operated by a great
   variety of organizations, with diverse goals and rules, good user
   service requires that the operators and administrators of the
   Internet follow some common guidelines for policies and operations.
   While these guidelines are generally different in scope and style
   from protocol standards, their establishment needs a similar process
   for consensus building.

   Finally, the BCP subseries may be used to document the operation of
   the IETF itself.  For example, this document defines the IETF
   Standards Process and is published as a BCP.

7.1.  BCP Review Process

   Unlike standards-track documents, the mechanisms described in BCPs
   are not well suited to the phased roll-in nature of the two-stage
   standards track and instead generally only make sense for full and
   immediate instantiation.

   The BCP process is similar to that for proposed standards.  The BCP
   is submitted to the IESG for review (see Section 8.1), and the
   existing review process applies, including a Last-Call on the IETF
   Announce mailing list.  However, once the IESG has approved the
   document, the process ends and the document is published.  The
   resulting document is viewed as having the technical approval of the
   IETF.

   Specifically, a document to be considered for the status of BCP must
   undergo the procedures outlined in Section 8, and Section 8.6 of this
   document.  The BCP process may be appealed according to the
   procedures in Section 8.7.

   Because BCPs are meant to express community consensus but are arrived
   at more quickly than standards, BCPs require particular care.
   Specifically, BCPs should not be viewed simply as stronger
   Informational RFCs, but rather should be viewed as documents suitable
   for a content different from Informational RFCs.

   A specification, or group of specifications, that has, or have been
   approved as a BCP is assigned a number in the BCP subseries.

8.  Standards Actions

   A "standards action" -- entering a particular specification into,
   advancing it within, or removing it from, the standards track -- must
   be approved by the IESG.

   The mechanics of the Internet Standards Process involve decisions of
   the IESG concerning the elevation of a specification onto the
   standards track or the movement of a standards-track specification
   from one maturity level to another.  Although a number of reasonably
   objective criteria (described below and in Section 6) are available
   to guide the IESG in making a decision to move a specification onto,
   along, or off the standards track, there is no algorithmic guarantee
   of elevation to or progression along the standards track for any
   specification.  The experienced collective judgment of the IESG
   concerning the technical quality of a specification proposed for
   elevation to or advancement in the standards track is an essential
   component of the decision-making process.

8.1.  Initiation of Action

   A specification that is intended to enter or advance in the Internet
   standards track shall first be posted as an Internet-Draft (see
   Section 4.2) unless it has not changed since publication as an RFC.
   It shall remain as an Internet-Draft for a period of time, not less
   than two weeks, that permits useful community review, after which a
   recommendation for action may be initiated.

   A standards action is initiated by a recommendation by the IETF
   Working group responsible for a specification to its Area Director,
   copied to the IETF Secretariat or, in the case of a specification not
   associated with a Working Group, a recommendation by an individual to
   the IESG.

   For classification as an Internet Standard, the request for
   reclassification must include an explanation of how the following
   criteria have been met:

   1.  There are at least two independent interoperating implementations
       with widespread deployment and successful operational experience.
       Although not required by the Internet Standards Process,
       [RFC5657] can be helpful to conduct interoperability testing.

   2.  There are no errata against the specification that would cause a
       new implementation to fail to interoperate with deployed ones.

   3.  There are no unused features in the specification that greatly
       increase implementation complexity.

   4.  If the technology required to implement the specification
       requires patented or otherwise controlled technology, then the
       set of implementations must demonstrate at least two independent,
       separate and successful uses of the licensing process.

8.2.  IESG Review and Approval

   The IESG shall determine whether or not a specification submitted to
   it according to Section 8.1 satisfies the applicable criteria for the
   recommended action (see Section 6.1 and Section 6.2), and shall in
   addition determine whether or not the technical quality and clarity
   of the specification is consistent with that expected for the
   maturity level to which the specification is recommended.

   In order to obtain all of the information necessary to make these
   determinations, particularly when the specification is considered by
   the IESG to be extremely important in terms of its potential impact
   on the Internet or on the suite of Internet protocols, the IESG may,
   at its discretion, commission an independent technical review of the
   specification.

   The IESG will send notice to the IETF of the pending IESG
   consideration of the document(s) to permit a final review by the
   general Internet community.  This "Last-Call" notification shall be
   via electronic mail to the IETF Announce mailing list.  Comments on a
   Last-Call shall be accepted from anyone, and should be sent as
   directed in the Last-Call announcement.

   Except as described below, the Last-Call period shall be no shorter
   than two weeks except in those cases where the proposed standards
   action was not initiated by an IETF Working Group, such as when an AD
   sponsors a draft [ADSPONSOR], in which case the Last-Call period
   shall be no shorter than four weeks.  If the IESG believes that the
   community interest would be served by allowing more time for comment,
   it may decide on a longer Last-Call period or to explicitly lengthen
   a current Last-Call period.

   For an Internet Standard, the IESG will perform a review and
   consideration of any errata that have been filed.  If they do not
   believe any of these should hold up the advancement, then the IESG,
   in an IETF-wide Last Call of at least four weeks, informs the
   community of their intent to advance a document from Proposed
   Standard to Internet Standard.

   If there is consensus for reclassification, the RFC will be
   reclassified with or without publication of a new RFC.

   In a timely fashion after the expiration of the Last-Call period, the
   IESG shall make its final determination of whether or not to approve
   the standards action, and shall notify the IETF of its decision via
   electronic mail to the IETF Announce mailing list.

   The IESG is not bound by the action recommended when the
   specification was submitted.  For example, the IESG may decide to
   consider the specification for publication in a different maturity
   level than that requested.  If the IESG determines this before the
   Last- Call is issued then the Last-Call should reflect the IESG's
   view.  The IESG could also decide to change the publication maturity
   level based on the response to a Last-Call.  If this decision would
   result in a specification being published at a "higher" level than
   the original Last-Call was for, a new Last-Call should be issued
   indicating the IESG recommendation.  In addition, in case of
   significant controvery in response to the Last-Call, The IESG may
   decide to refer the document back to the Working Group, the authors,
   or hold the document for the creation of a new Working Group.

8.3.  Publication

   In no event shall a document be published on the IETF Stream without
   IETF consensus.

   If a standards action is approved, notification is sent to the RFC
   Editor and copied to the IETF with instructions to publish the
   specification as an RFC.  The specification shall at that point be
   removed from the Internet-Drafts directory.

8.4.  Advancing in the Standards Track

   The procedure described in Section 8 is followed for each action that
   attends the advancement of a specification along the standards track.

   A specification shall remain at the Proposed Standard level for at
   least six months.  This minimum period is intended to ensure adequate
   opportunity for community review without severely impacting
   timeliness.  The interval shall be measured from the date of
   publication of the corresponding RFC(s), or, if the action does not
   result in RFC publication, the date of the announcement of the IESG
   approval of the action.

   A specification may be (indeed, is likely to be) revised as it
   advances through the standards track.  At each stage, the IESG shall
   determine the scope and significance of the revision to the
   specification, and, if necessary and appropriate, modify the
   recommended action.  Minor revisions are expected, but a significant
   revision may require that the specification accumulate more
   experience at its current maturity level before progressing.
   Finally, if the specification has been changed very significantly,
   the IESG may recommend that the revision be treated as a new
   document, re- entering the standards track at the beginning.

   Change of status shall result in republication of the specification
   as an RFC, except in the rare case that there have been no changes at
   all in the specification since the last publication.  Generally,
   desired changes will be "batched" for incorporation at the next level
   in the standards track.  However, deferral of changes to the next
   standards action on the specification will not always be possible or
   desirable; for example, an important typographical error, or a
   technical error that does not represent a change in overall function
   of the specification, may need to be corrected immediately.  In such
   cases, the IESG or RPC may be asked to republish the RFC (with a new
   number) with corrections, and this will not reset the minimum time-
   at-level clock.

8.5.  Revising a Standard

   A new version of an established Internet Standard must progress
   through the full Internet standardization process as if it were a
   completely new specification.  Once the new version has reached the
   Standard level, it will usually replace the previous version, which
   will be moved to Historic status.  However, in some cases both
   versions may remain as Internet Standards to honor the requirements
   of an installed base.  In this situation, the relationship between
   the previous and the new versions must be explicitly stated in the
   text of the new version or in another appropriate document (e.g., an
   Applicability Statement; see Section 5.2).

8.6.  Retiring a Standard

   As the technology changes and matures, it is possible for a new
   Standard specification to be so clearly superior technically that one
   or more existing standards track specifications for the same function
   should be retired.  In this case, or when it is felt for some other
   reason that an existing standards track specification should be
   retired, the IESG shall approve a change of status of the old
   specification(s) to Historic.  This recommendation shall be issued
   with the same Last-Call and notification procedures used for any
   other standards action.  A request to retire an existing standard can
   originate from a Working Group, an Area Director or some other
   interested party.

8.7.  Conflict Resolution and Appeals

   Disputes are possible at various stages during the IETF process.  As
   much as possible the process is designed so that compromises can be
   made, and genuine consensus achieved, however there are times when
   even the most reasonable and knowledgeable people are unable to
   agree.  To achieve the goals of openness and fairness, such conflicts
   must be resolved by a process of open review and discussion.  This
   section specifies the procedures that shall be followed to deal with
   Internet Standards Process issues that cannot be resolved through the
   normal processes whereby IETF Working Groups and other Internet
   Standards Process participants ordinarily reach consensus.

8.7.1.  Working Group Disputes

   An individual (whether a participant in the relevant Working Group or
   not) may disagree with a Working Group recommendation based on his or
   her belief that either (a) his or her own views have not been
   adequately considered by the Working Group, or (b) the Working Group
   has made an incorrect technical choice which places the quality and/
   or integrity of the Working Group's product(s) in significant
   jeopardy.  The first issue is a difficulty with Working Group
   process; the latter is an assertion of technical error.  These two
   types of disagreement are quite different, but both are handled by
   the same process of review.

   A person who disagrees with a Working Group recommendation shall
   always first discuss the matter with the Working Group's chair(s),
   who may involve other members of the Working Group (or the Working
   Group as a whole) in the discussion.

   If the disagreement cannot be resolved in this way, any of the
   parties involved may bring it to the attention of the Area
   Director(s) for the area in which the Working Group is chartered.
   The Area Director(s) shall attempt to resolve the dispute.

   If the disagreement cannot be resolved by the Area Director(s) any of
   the parties involved may then appeal to the IESG as a whole.  The
   IESG shall then review the situation and attempt to resolve it in a
   manner of its own choosing.

   If the disagreement is not resolved to the satisfaction of the
   parties at the IESG level, any of the parties involved may appeal the
   decision to the IAB.  The IAB shall then review the situation and
   attempt to resolve it in a manner of its own choosing.

   The IAB decision is final with respect to the question of whether or
   not the Internet Standards Processes have been followed and with
   respect to all questions of technical merit.

8.7.2.  Process Failures

   This document sets forward procedures required to be followed to
   ensure openness and fairness of the Internet Standards Process, and
   the technical viability of the standards created.  The IESG is the
   principal agent of the IETF for this purpose, and it is the IESG that
   is charged with ensuring that the required procedures have been
   followed, and that any necessary prerequisites to a standards action
   have been met.

   If an individual should disagree with an action taken by the IESG in
   this process, that person should first discuss the issue with the
   IESG Chair.  If the IESG Chair is unable to satisfy the complainant
   then the IESG as a whole should re-examine the action taken, along
   with input from the complainant, and determine whether any further
   action is needed.  The IESG shall issue a report on its review of the
   complaint to the IETF.

   Should the complainant not be satisfied with the outcome of the IESG
   review, an appeal may be lodged to the IAB.  The IAB shall then
   review the situation and attempt to resolve it in a manner of its own
   choosing and report to the IETF on the outcome of its review.

   If circumstances warrant, the IAB may direct that an IESG decision be
   annulled, and the situation shall then be as it was before the IESG
   decision was taken.  The IAB may also recommend an action to the
   IESG, or make such other recommendations as it deems fit.  The IAB
   may not, however, pre-empt the role of the IESG by issuing a decision
   which only the IESG is empowered to make.

   The IAB decision is final with respect to the question of whether or
   not the Internet Standards Processes have been followed.

8.7.3.  Questions of Applicable Procedure

   Further recourse is available only in cases in which the procedures
   themselves (i.e., the procedures described in this document) are
   claimed to be inadequate or insufficient to the protection of the
   rights of all parties in a fair and open Internet Standards Process.
   Claims on this basis may be made to the ISOC Board of Trustees.  The
   President of the ISOC shall acknowledge such an appeal within two
   weeks, and shall at the time of acknowledgment advise the petitioner
   of the expected duration of the Trustees' review of the appeal.  The
   Trustees shall review the situation in a manner of its own choosing
   and report to the IETF on the outcome of its review.

   The Trustees' decision upon completion of their review shall be final
   with respect to all aspects of the dispute.

8.7.4.  Appeals Procedure

   All appeals must include a detailed and specific description of the
   facts of the dispute.

   All appeals must be initiated within two months of the public
   knowledge of the action or decision to be challenged.

   At all stages of the appeals process, the individuals or bodies
   responsible for making the decisions have the discretion to define
   the specific procedures they will follow in the process of making
   their decision.

   In all cases a decision concerning the disposition of the dispute,
   and the communication of that decision to the parties involved, must
   be accomplished within a reasonable period of time.

   NOTE: These procedures intentionally and explicitly do not establish
   a fixed maximum time period that shall be considered "reasonable" in
   all cases.  The Internet Standards Process places a premium on
   consensus and efforts to achieve it, and deliberately forgoes
   deterministically swift execution of procedures in favor of a
   latitude within which more genuine technical agreements may be
   reached.

9.  External Standards and Specifications

   Many standards groups other than the IETF create and publish
   standards documents for network protocols and services.  When these
   external specifications play an important role in the Internet, it is
   desirable to reach common agreements on their usage -- i.e., to
   establish Internet Standards relating to these external
   specifications.

   There are two categories of external specifications:

   *  Open Standards: Various national and international standards
      bodies, such as ANSI, ISO, IEEE, and ITU-T, develop a variety of
      protocol and service specifications that are similar to Technical
      Specifications defined here.  National and international groups
      also publish "implementors' agreements" that are analogous to
      Applicability Statements, capturing a body of implementation-
      specific detail concerned with the practical application of their
      standards.  All of these are considered to be "open external
      standards" for the purposes of the Internet Standards Process.

   *  Other Specifications: Other proprietary specifications that have
      come to be widely used in the Internet may be treated by the
      Internet community as if they were a "standard."  Such a
      specification is not generally developed in an open fashion, is
      typically proprietary, and is controlled by the vendor, vendors,
      or organization that produced it.

9.1.  Use of External Specifications

   To avoid conflict between competing versions of a specification, the
   Internet community will not standardize a specification that is
   simply an "Internet version" of an existing external specification
   unless an explicit cooperative arrangement to do so has been made.
   However, there are several ways in which an external specification
   that is important for the operation and/or evolution of the Internet
   may be adopted for Internet use.

9.1.1.  Incorporation of an Open Standard

   An Internet Standard TS or AS may incorporate an open external
   standard by reference.  For example, an Internet Standard
   incorporates by reference the Ethernet Standard [ETHERNET].  Whenever
   possible, the referenced specification shall be available without
   restriction or undue fee using standard Internet applications such as
   the WWW.

9.1.2.  Incorporation of Other Specifications

   Other proprietary specifications may be incorporated by reference to
   a version of the specification as long as the proprietor meets the
   requirements of Section 2.1.  If the other proprietary specification
   is not widely and readily available, the IESG may request that it be
   published as an Informational RFC.

   The IESG generally should not favor a particular proprietary
   specification over technically equivalent and competing
   specification(s) by making any incorporated vendor specification
   "required" or "recommended".

9.1.3.  Assumption

   An IETF Working Group may start from an external specification and
   develop it into an Internet specification.  This is acceptable if (1)
   the specification is provided to the Working Group in compliance with
   the requirements of Section 2.1, and (2) change control has been
   conveyed to IETF by the original developer of the specification for
   the specification or for specifications derived from the original
   specification.

10.  Notices and Record Keeping

   Each of the organizations involved in the development and approval of
   Internet Standards shall publicly announce, and shall maintain a
   publicly accessible record of, every activity in which it engages, to
   the extent that the activity represents the prosecution of any part
   of the Internet Standards Process.  For purposes of this section, the
   organizations involved in the development and approval of Internet
   Standards includes the IETF, the IESG, the IAB, all IETF Working
   Groups, and the Internet Society Board of Trustees.

   For IETF and Working Group meetings announcements shall be made by
   electronic mail to the IETF Announce mailing list and shall be made
   sufficiently far in advance of the activity to permit all interested
   parties to effectively participate.  The announcement shall contain
   (or provide pointers to) all of the information that is necessary to
   support the participation of any interested individual.  In the case
   of a meeting, for example, the announcement shall include an agenda
   that specifies the standards-related issues that will be discussed.

   The formal record of an organization's standards-related activity
   shall include at least the following:

   *  The charter of the organization (or a defining document equivalent
      to a charter);

   *  Complete and accurate minutes of meetings;

   *  The archives of Working Group electronic mail mailing lists; and

   *  All written contributions from participants that pertain to the
      organization's standards-related activity.

   As a practical matter, the formal record of all Internet Standards
   Process activities is maintained by the IETF LLC or its designees.
   Also, the Working Group chair is responsible for providing complete
   and accurate minutes of all Working Group meetings.  Internet-Drafts
   that have been removed (for any reason) from the Internet-Drafts
   directories shall be archived for the sole purpose of preserving an
   historical record of Internet Standards Process activity and thus are
   not retrievable except in special circumstances.

11.  Varying the Process

   This document, which sets out the rules and procedures by which
   Internet Standards and related documents are made is itself a product
   of the Internet Standards Process (as a BCP, as described in
   Section 7.)  It replaces a previous version, and in time, is likely
   itself to be replaced.

   While, when published, this document represents the community's view
   of the proper and correct process to follow, and requirements to be
   met, to allow for the best possible Internet Standards and BCPs, it
   cannot be assumed that this will always remain the case.  From time
   to time there may be a desire to update it, by replacing it with a
   new version.  Updating this document uses the same open procedures as
   are used for any other BCP.

   In addition, there may be situations where following the procedures
   leads to a deadlock about a specific specification, or there may be
   situations where the procedures provide no guidance.  In these cases
   it may be appropriate to invoke the variance procedure described
   below.

11.1.  The Variance Procedure

   Upon the recommendation of the responsible IETF Working Group (or, if
   no Working Group is constituted, upon the recommendation of an ad hoc
   committee), the IESG may enter a particular specification into, or
   advance it within, the standards track even though some of the
   requirements of this document have not or will not be met.  The IESG
   may approve such a variance, however, only if it first determines
   that the likely benefits to the Internet community are likely to
   outweigh any costs to the Internet community that result from
   noncompliance with the requirements in this document.  In exercising
   this discretion, the IESG shall at least consider (a) the technical
   merit of the specification, (b) the possibility of achieving the
   goals of the Internet Standards Process without granting a variance,
   (c) alternatives to the granting of a variance, (d) the collateral
   and precedential effects of granting a variance, and (e) the IESG's
   ability to craft a variance that is as narrow as possible.  In
   determining whether to approve a variance, the IESG has discretion to
   limit the scope of the variance to particular parts of this document
   and to impose such additional restrictions or limitations as it
   determines appropriate to protect the interests of the Internet
   community.

   The proposed variance must detail the problem perceived, explain the
   precise provision of this document which is causing the need for a
   variance, and the results of the IESG's considerations including
   consideration of points (a) through (d) in the previous paragraph.
   The proposed variance shall be issued as an Internet Draft.  The IESG
   shall then issue an extended Last-Call, of no less than 4 weeks, to
   allow for community comment upon the proposal.

   In a timely fashion after the expiration of the Last-Call period, the
   IESG shall make its final determination of whether or not to approve
   the proposed variance, and shall notify the IETF of its decision via
   electronic mail to the IETF Announce mailing list.  If the variance
   is approved it shall be forwarded to the RPC with a request that it
   be published as a BCP.

   This variance procedure is for use when a one-time waiver of some
   provision of this document is felt to be required.  Permanent changes
   to this document shall be accomplished through the normal BCP
   process.

   The appeals process in Section 8.7 applies to this process.

11.2.  Exclusions

   No use of this procedure may lower any specified delays, nor exempt
   any proposal from the requirements of openness, fairness, or
   consensus, nor from the need to keep proper records of the meetings
   and mailing list discussions.

   Specifically, the following sections of this document must not be
   subject of a variance: Section 7.1, Section 8, Section 8.1 (first
   paragraph), Section 8.2, Section 8.5 (first sentence), Section 8.7
   and Section 11.

12.  Security Considerations

   Security issues are not discussed in this memo.

13.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA actions.

14.  Change Log

14.1.  Working group draft

   *  Draft 0: Adopted by PROCON WG.

   *  Draft 1: Various GitHub fixes.  Improve 7475 obsolescence text.
      Add wording about RFC style, output formats, default input; remove
      text about standards requiring ASCII.  Unindent or remove text
      blocks.  Discuss legacy "Draft Standard" documents.  Tighten IPR
      requirements on Informational.  Add WG changelog section.

   *  Draft 2: Fix link to repository, tweak wording about RFC style and
      formats.  Clarify that not all discussions must be public.

   *  Draft 3: Refer to BCP78 for definition of "Contribution."
      Clearify procedures for Experimental and Informational.  Clarify
      ADs can delegate handlling an appeal.  Add AD sponsor as an
      example of non-WG initiation.  IETF LLC maintains mailing lists
      anad public records.  Renamed IETF Trust to IETF Intellectual
      Property Management Corporation.  Various minor editorial/wording
      changes.

   *  Draft 4: Remove terminology section; use references on first use
      when needed.  Consistency around "Internet Standards Process" term
      use and capitalization.  Change "RFC Editor" to "RFC Publication
      Center."  Put punctuation inside the quotation where necessary.
      Avoid "Internet Standards-related" construction Use subseries
      consistently for BCP/STD.  Update BCP definition and explain those
      that affect the standards process are published on the IETF
      stream.

   *  Draft 5: Update Internet-Draft section (with Brian Carpenter).
      Remove out-of-scope BCP sentence.

   *  Draft 6: More wording fixes from Pete caused by #4.  It's RFC
      Production (not Publication) Center.  BCP and STD may issue new
      RFC number or not.  A subseries may have multiple RFCs.  When an
      RFC is obsoleted, it is removed from the subseries and the
      obsoleting RFC is added.  Fix text and link to published list of
      RFCs, STD, etc.

   *  Draft 7: Re-order IESG Evaluation to fully undo paragraph
      shuffling.  Remove added text about when an "update" RFC is in the
      subseries.  Change RFC Editor link for subseries info.  Add
      reference to BCP97.

   *  Draft 8: Add "standards action requires IESG approval" paragraph.

   *  Draft 9: Remove some changes that were decided to be out of scope
      as identified by Dan Bernstein and confirmed by Roman.

   *  Draft 10: Use Unicode instead of ASCII as external standard
      example (editorial).  Add references to RFC 8712 and RFC 9920;
      mention other online fora per RFC 9945 (editorial).  Move "IETF
      stream needs rough consensus" to the RFC section (4.1)
      (editorial).  Remove mention of other streams from Experimental
      (editorial).  All inf/exp drafts get IETSG review (implied by 2026
      and 8789).  Remove "directly" from inf/exp publication as its a
      holdover from when the RFC Editor (sic) could publish them w/o
      IESG (editorial).  Edit section headings and move text to avoid
      re-using the draft title as a section header (editorial).  Add WG
      folks to acknowledgements (editorial).

   *  Draft 11: Revise wording to say non-standard-track maturity also
      follow the process defined in Sec 8 (editorial).  A TS can use
      elective or optional (editorial).

   *  Draft 12: Change wording about IETF last call (editorial).  Remove
      missed "need not be public" sentence from draft 9 (see above) Use
      Ethernet not Unicode as a sample reference (JohnK at IETF 126).
      Avoid most uses of links into specific pages (Jean at IETF 126)

14.2.  Individual draft

   *  Draft 0: Translated the nroff source of RFC 2026 into markdown.
      The notices in the document at section 12.4 were prefaced with
      "THIS TEXT ADDED TO PASS THE IDNITS CHECKS" so that the draft
      could be published.  The copyright notice is changed to the
      current one.  Because of this and other boilerplate, some section
      numbers differ from the original RFC.

   *  Draft 1: Add Scott Bradner as co-author.  Add Note.  Alphabetize
      terminology.  Minor wording tweaks.

   *  Draft 2: Clarified Note about the RFC's.  More word tweaks.
      Remove bulk of text from the Notices, and point to RFC 2026, to
      avoid confusion and pass the idnits checks.

   *  Draft 3: Incorporated RFC 5378.

   *  Draft 4: Updated terminology and removed some obvious or old
      terms.  In some cases this meant minor editorial changes in the
      body text.

   *  Draft 5: Add text about RFC 5657 and errata to the intro Note.
      Incorporate RFC 5742.

   *  Draft 6: Incorporate RFC 6410.  Moved some text around to make the
      new text flow a bit better.

   *  Draft 7: Incorporate RFC 7100, RFC 7475, and RFC 9282.  Add
      mention of the "rfcindex.txt" file.

   *  Draft 8: Incorporate RFC 7127.

   *  Draft 9: Incorporate RFC 8789.  Updates (not obsoletes) RFC 5378,
      RFC 5657, and RFC 7475.

   *  Draft 10: Incorporate RFC 8179.

   *  Draft 11: Remove IPR section (RFC 5378 and RFC 8179) and add a
      pointer to those RFCs instead.

   *  Draft 12: Addressed the editorial issues found by the following
      verified errata: 523, 524, 1622, 3014, 3095, and 7181.  Errata
      3095 was marked as editorial, although it seems to be a semantic
      change but one that properly reflects consensus.  The following
      errata were closed by the conversion to markdown and associated
      tooling, as they do the right thing: 6658, 6659, 6661, 6671, and
      6669.

   *  Draft 13: Address some pre-adoption issues raised on the WG
      mailing list.

15.  References

15.1.  Normative References

   [BCP78]    Best Current Practice 78,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/bcp78>.
              At the time of writing, this BCP comprises the following:

              Bradner, S., Ed. and J. Contreras, Ed., "Rights
              Contributors Provide to the IETF Trust", BCP 78, RFC 5378,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC5378, November 2008,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5378>.

   [BCP79]    Best Current Practice 79,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/bcp79>.
              At the time of writing, this BCP comprises the following:

              Bradner, S. and J. Contreras, "Intellectual Property
              Rights in IETF Technology", BCP 79, RFC 8179,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8179, May 2017,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8179>.

   [BCP97]    Best Current Practice 97,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/bcp97>.
              At the time of writing, this BCP comprises the following:

              Bush, R. and T. Narten, "Clarifying when Standards Track
              Documents may Refer Normatively to Documents at a Lower
              Level", BCP 97, RFC 3967, DOI 10.17487/RFC3967, January
              2005, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc3967>.

              Klensin, J. and S. Hartman, "Handling Normative References
              to Standards-Track Documents", BCP 97, RFC 4897,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC4897, June 2007,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4897>.

              Leiba, B., "Updating When Standards Track Documents May
              Refer Normatively to Documents at a Lower Level", BCP 97,
              RFC 8067, DOI 10.17487/RFC8067, January 2017,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8067>.

   [RFC1796]  Huitema, C., Postel, J., and S. Crocker, "Not All RFCs are
              Standards", RFC 1796, DOI 10.17487/RFC1796, April 1995,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc1796>.

   [RFC8712]  Camarillo, G. and J. Livingood, "The IETF-ISOC
              Relationship", RFC 8712, DOI 10.17487/RFC8712, February
              2020, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8712>.

   [RFC9281]  Salz, R., "Entities Involved in the IETF Standards
              Process", BCP 11, RFC 9281, DOI 10.17487/RFC9281, June
              2022, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9281>.

15.2.  Informative References

   [ADSPONSOR]
              "Guidance on Area Director Sponsoring of Documents", March
              2007, <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/statement-iesg-
              guidance-on-area-director-sponsoring-of-documents-
              20070320/>.

   [ETHERNET] IEEE, "IEEE Standard for Ethernet", July 2022.  IEEE
              802.3-2022

   [RFC1311]  Postel, J., "Introduction to the STD Notes", RFC 1311,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC1311, March 1992,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc1311>.

   [RFC2026]  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision
              3", BCP 9, RFC 2026, DOI 10.17487/RFC2026, October 1996,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2026>.

   [RFC4844]  Daigle, L., Ed. and IAB, "The RFC Series and RFC Editor",
              RFC 4844, DOI 10.17487/RFC4844, July 2007,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc4844>.

   [RFC5657]  Dusseault, L. and R. Sparks, "Guidance on Interoperation
              and Implementation Reports for Advancement to Draft
              Standard", BCP 9, RFC 5657, DOI 10.17487/RFC5657,
              September 2009, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc5657>.

   [RFC5742]  Alvestrand, H. and R. Housley, "IESG Procedures for
              Handling of Independent and IRTF Stream Submissions",
              BCP 92, RFC 5742, DOI 10.17487/RFC5742, December 2009,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc5742>.

   [RFCED]    "RFC Editor", n.d., <https://www.rfc-editor.org/>.

   [_2418bis] Salz, R., Schinazi, D., and S. O. Bradner, "IETF Working
              Group Guidelines and Procedures", Work in Progress,
              Internet-Draft, draft-ietf-procon-2418bis-03, 6 July 2026,
              <https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-ietf-procon-
              2418bis-03>.

Acknowledgments

   We gratefully acknowledge those who have contributed to the
   development of IETF RFC's and the processes that create both the
   content and documents.  In particular, we thank the authors of all
   the documents that updated [RFC2026].

   We also thank Sandy Ginoza of the Secretariat for sending all the
   original RFC sources, and John Klensin for his support and
   cooperation during the process of creating this document.

   Finally, we thank the members and Chairs of the Working Group for
   their suggestions and comments.  In particular, Jari Arkko, Brian
   Carpenter, Pete Resnick, Rob Sayre, and David Schinazi made notable
   contributions.  We also thank Dan Bernstein for his feedback.

Authors' Addresses

   Rich Salz
   Akamai Technologies
   Email: rsalz@akamai.com


   Scott Bradner
   Harvard University (retired)
   Email: sob@sobco.com
