



xxxxxxx                                                          R. Salz
Internet-Draft                                       Akamai Technologies
Obsoletes: 2026, 5378, 5657, 6410, 7100, 7127,                S. Bradner
           7475, 8179, 8789, 9282 (if approved)                    SOBCO
Intended status: Best Current Practice                    22 August 2024
Expires: 23 February 2025


                     The Internet Standards Process
                       draft-rsalz-2026bis-latest

Abstract

   This memo documents the process used by the Internet community for
   the standardization of protocols and procedures.  It defines the
   stages in the standardization process, the requirements for moving a
   document between stages and the types of documents used during this
   process.  It also addresses the intellectual property rights and
   copyright issues associated with the standards process.

   This document obsoletes RFC2026, RFC5378, RFC5657, RFC6410, RFC7100,
   RFC7127, RFC7475, RFC8179, RFC8789, and RFC9282.

About This Document

   This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.

   Status information for this document may be found at
   https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-rsalz-2026bis/.

   Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
   https://github.com/richsalz/draft-rsalz-2026bis.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 23 February 2025.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2024 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction
     1.1.  Terminology
   2.  The Internet Standards Process
   3.  Organization of This Document
   4.  Internet Standards-Related Publications
     4.1.  Requests for Comments (RFCs)
     4.2.  Internet-Drafts
   5.  Internet Standard Specifications
     5.1.  Technical Specification (TS)
     5.2.  Applicability Statement (AS)
     5.3.  Requirement Levels
   6.  The Internet Standards Track
     6.1.  Standards Track Maturity Levels
       6.1.1.  Proposed Standard
       6.1.2.  Internet Standard
     6.2.  Non-Standards Track Maturity Levels
       6.2.1.  Experimental
       6.2.2.  Informational
       6.2.3.  Procedures for Experimental and Informational RFCs
       6.2.4.  Historic
   7.  Best Current Practice (BCP) RFCs
     7.1.  BCP Review Process
   8.  The Internet Standards Process
     8.1.  Standards Actions
       8.1.1.  Initiation of Action
       8.1.2.  IESG Review and Approval
       8.1.3.  Publication
     8.2.  Advancing in the Standards Track
     8.3.  Revising a Standard
     8.4.  Retiring a Standard
     8.5.  Conflict Resolution and Appeals
       8.5.1.  Working Group Disputes
       8.5.2.  Process Failures
       8.5.3.  Questions of Applicable Procedure
       8.5.4.  Appeals Procedure
   9.  External Standards and Specifications
     9.1.  Use of External Specifications
       9.1.1.  Incorporation of an Open Standard
       9.1.2.  Incorporation of Other Specifications
       9.1.3.  Assumption
   10. Notices and Record Keeping
   11. Varying the Process
     11.1.  The Variance Procedure
     11.2.  Exclusions
   12. Intellectual Property Rights
     12.1.  Background
     12.2.  Exposition of Why These Procedures Are the Way They Are
       12.2.1.  Rights Granted in Contributions
       12.2.2.  Rights to Use Contributions
       12.2.3.  Right to Produce Derivative Works
       12.2.4.  Rights to Use Trademarks
       12.2.5.  Contributions Not Subject to Copyright
       12.2.6.  Copyright in RFCs
       12.2.7.  General Policy
       12.2.8.  Confidentiality Obligations
       12.2.9.  Rights Granted by Contributors to the IETF Trust
       12.2.10. Sublicenses by the IETF Trust
       12.2.11. No Patent License
       12.2.12. Representations and Warranties
       12.2.13. No Duty to Publish
       12.2.14. Trademarks
       12.2.15. Copyright in RFCs
       12.2.16. Contributors' Retention of Rights
     12.3.  Legends, Notices and Other Standardized Text in IETF
            Documents
   13. Security Considerations
   14. IANA Considerations
   15. Change Log
   16. References
     16.1.  Normative References
     16.2.  Informative References
   Acknowledgments
   Authors' Addresses

1.  Introduction

      NOTE: This document started with the raw text of RFC 2026.  The
      plan is that each version of this Internet-Draft will incorporate
      one of the 10 RFCs that updated the original.  Once all have been
      merged in, we will submit this to the GENDISPATCH working group
      to determine the next steps.

      Specifically, the RFCs to be incorporated are: RFC 5378,
      RFC 6410, RFC 7100, RFC 7127, RFC 7475, RFC 8179,
      RFC 8789, and RFC 9282.

      RFC 3667 was obsoleted by RFC 3978, which in turn was obsoleted
      by RFC 5378.  RFC 3668 was obsoleted by RFC 3979, which in turn
      was obsoleted by RFC 8179.  RFC 3932 was obsoleted by RFC 5742.
      RFC 3978 was obsoleted by RFC 8179.  RFC 5657 became not relevant
      because of RFC 6410, which is also emphasized by RFC 7127.

      If this document gets adopted by a Working Group, the errata for
      all of the above-mentioned RFCs should be reviewed.

   This memo documents the process currently used by the Internet
   community for the standardization of protocols and procedures.  The
   Internet Standards process is an activity of the Internet Society
   (ISOC) that is organized and managed on behalf of the Internet
   community by the Internet Architecture Board (IAB) and the Internet
   Engineering Steering Group (IESG).

   The Internet, a loosely-organized international collaboration of
   autonomous, interconnected networks, supports host-to-host
   communication through voluntary adherence to open protocols and
   procedures defined by Internet Standards.  There are also many
   isolated interconnected networks, which are not connected to the
   global Internet but use the Internet Standards.

   The Internet Standards Process described in this document is
   concerned with all protocols, procedures, and conventions that are
   used in or by the Internet, whether or not they are part of the TCP/
   IP protocol suite.  In the case of protocols developed and/or
   standardized by non-Internet organizations, however, the Internet
   Standards Process normally applies to the application of the protocol
   or procedure in the Internet context, not to the specification of the
   protocol itself.

   In general, an Internet Standard is a specification that is stable
   and well-understood, is technically competent, has multiple,
   independent, and interoperable implementations with substantial
   operational experience, enjoys significant public support, and is
   recognizably useful in some or all parts of the Internet.

   The process described here only applies to the IETF RFC stream.  See
   [RFC4844] for the definition of the streams and [RFC5742] for a
   description of the IESG responsibilities related to those streams.

1.1.  Terminology

   Although this document is not an IETF Standards Track publication, it
   adopts the conventions for normative language to provide clarity of
   instructions to the implementer.  The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT",
   "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT",
   "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in BCP 14 [RFC2119]
   [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all capitals, as shown
   here.

   The following terms are used throughout this document.  For more
   details about the organizations related to the IETF, see [RFC9281],
   Section 3.

   Area Director  The manager of an IETF Area.

   Contribution  Any submission to the IETF intended by the Contributor
      for publication as all or part of an Internet-Draft or RFC and any
      statement made within the context of an IETF activity.  Such
      statements include oral statements in IETF sessions as well as
      written and electronic communications, made at any time or place,
      that are addressed to:

   *  The IETF plenary session,

   *  Any IETF working group or portion thereof,

   *  Any Birds of a Feather (BOF) session,

   *  The IESG, or any member thereof on behalf of the IESG,

   *  The IAB, or any member thereof on behalf of the IAB,

   *  Any IETF mailing list, including the IETF list itself, any working
      group or design team list, or any other list functioning under
      IETF auspices,

   *  The RFC Editor or the Internet-Drafts function.

   Statements made outside of an IETF session, mailing list, or other
   function, that are clearly not intended to be input to an IETF
   activity, group, or function are not IETF Contributions in the
   context of this document.

   ARPA  Advanced Research Projects Agency; an agency of the US
      Department of Defense.

   Contributor  An individual submitting a Contribution.

   Copyright  The legal right granted to an author in a document or
      other work of authorship under applicable law.  A "copyright" is
      not equivalent to a "right to copy".  Rather a copyright
      encompasses all of the exclusive rights that an author has in a
      work, such as the rights to copy, publish, distribute and create
      derivative works of the work.  An author often cedes these rights
      to his or her employer or other parties as a condition of
      employment or compensation.

   IETF  In the context of this document, the IETF includes all
      individuals who participate in meetings, working groups, mailing
      lists, functions, and other activities that are organized or
      initiated by ISOC, the IESG, or the IAB under the general
      designation of the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), but
      solely to the extent of such participation.

   IETF Area  A management division within the IETF.  An Area consists
      of Working Groups related to a general topic such as routing.  An
      Area is managed by one or two Area Directors.

   IETF Documents  RFCs and Internet-Drafts that are used in the IETF
      Standards Process as defined here.  This is identical to the "IETF
      stream" defined in [RFC4844].

   IETF Standards Process  The activities undertaken by the IETF in any
      of the settings described in 1(a) above.

   IETF Trust  A trust established under the laws of the Commonwealth of
      Virginia, USA, in order to hold and administer intellectual
      property rights for the benefit of the IETF.

   Indirect Contributor  Any person who has materially or substantially
      contributed to a Contribution without being personally involved in
      its submission to the IETF.

   Internet-Draft  Temporary documents used in the IETF Standards
      Process.  Internet-Drafts are posted on the IETF web site by the
      IETF Secretariat.  As noted in Section 4.2, Internet-Drafts have a
      nominal maximum lifetime of six months in the IETF Secretariat's
      public directory.

   Internet Engineering Steering Group (IESG)  A group comprised of the
      IETF Area Directors and the IETF Chair.  The IESG is responsible
      for the management, along with the IAB, of the IETF and is the
      standards approval board for the IETF.

   interoperable  For the purposes of this document, "interoperable"
      means to be able to interoperate over a data communications path.

   Last-Call  A public comment period used to gage the level of
      consensus about the reasonableness of a proposed standards action.
      See Section 8.1.2.

   Legend Instructions  The standardized text that is maintained by the
      IETF Trust and is included in IETF Documents and the instructions
      and requirements for including that standardized text in IETF
      Documents.  The text and instructions are posted from time to time
      at the Trust Legal Provisions (https://trustee.ietf.org/documents/
      trust-legal-provisions/)

   RFC  The publication series used by the IETF among others.  RFCs are
      published by the RFC Editor.  Although RFCs may be superseded in
      whole or in part by subsequent RFCs, the text of an RFC is not
      altered once published in RFC form.  (See Section 4.1.)

   Reasonably and personally known  Something an individual knows
      personally or, because of the job the individual holds, would
      reasonably be expected to know.  This wording is used to indicate
      that an organization cannot purposely keep an individual in the
      dark about certain information just to avoid the disclosure
      requirement.

   Working Group  A group chartered by the IESG and IAB to work on a
      specific specification, set of specifications or topic.

2.  The Internet Standards Process

   In outline, the process of creating an Internet Standard is
   straightforward: a specification undergoes a period of development
   and several iterations of review by the Internet community and
   revision based upon experience, is adopted as a Standard by the
   appropriate body (see below), and is published.  In practice, the
   process is more complicated, due to (1) the difficulty of creating
   specifications of high technical quality; (2) the need to consider
   the interests of all of the affected parties; (3) the importance of
   establishing widespread community consensus; and (4) the difficulty
   of evaluating the utility of a particular specification for the
   Internet community.

   The goals of the Internet Standards Process are:

   *  Technical excellence;

   *  Prior implementation and testing;

   *  Clear, concise, and easily-understood documentation;

   *  Openness and fairness; and

   *  Timeliness

   The procedures described in this document are designed to be fair,
   open, and objective; to reflect existing (proven) practice; and to be
   flexible.

   *  These procedures are intended to provide a fair, open, and
      objective basis for developing, evaluating, and adopting Internet
      Standards.  They provide ample opportunity for participation and
      comment by all interested parties.  At each stage of the
      standardization process, a specification is repeatedly discussed
      and its merits debated in open meetings and/or public electronic
      mailing lists, and it is made available for review via world-wide
      on-line directories.

   *  These procedures are explicitly aimed at recognizing and adopting
      generally-accepted practices.  Thus, a candidate specification
      must be implemented and tested for correct operation and
      interoperability by multiple independent parties and utilized in
      increasingly demanding environments, before it can be adopted as
      an Internet Standard.

   *  These procedures provide a great deal of flexibility to adapt to
      the wide variety of circumstances that occur in the
      standardization process.  Experience has shown this flexibility to
      be vital in achieving the goals listed above.

   The goal of technical competence, the requirement for prior
   implementation and testing, and the need to allow all interested
   parties to comment all require significant time and effort.  On the
   other hand, today's rapid development of networking technology
   demands timely development of standards.  The Internet Standards
   Process is intended to balance these conflicting goals.  The process
   is believed to be as short and simple as possible without sacrificing
   technical excellence, thorough testing before adoption of a standard,
   or openness and fairness.

   From its inception, the Internet has been, and is expected to remain,
   an evolving system whose participants regularly factor new
   requirements and technology into its design and implementation.
   Users of the Internet and providers of the equipment, software, and
   services that support it should anticipate and embrace this evolution
   as a major tenet of Internet philosophy.

   The procedures described in this document are the result of a number
   of years of evolution, driven both by the needs of the growing and
   increasingly diverse Internet community, and by experience.

3.  Organization of This Document

   Section 4 describes the publications and archives of the Internet
   Standards Process.  Section 5 describes the types of Internet
   standard specifications.  Section 6 describes the Internet standards
   specifications track.  Section 7 describes Best Current Practice
   RFCs.  Section 8 describes the process and rules for Internet
   standardization.  Section 9 specifies the way in which externally-
   sponsored specifications and practices, developed and controlled by
   other standards bodies or by others, are handled within the Internet
   Standards Process.  Section 10 describes the requirements for notices
   and record keeping Section 11 defines a variance process to allow
   one-time exceptions to some of the requirements in this document
   Section 12 presents the rules that are required to protect
   intellectual property rights in the context of the development and
   use of Internet Standards.

4.  Internet Standards-Related Publications

4.1.  Requests for Comments (RFCs)

   Each distinct version of an Internet standards-related specification
   is published as part of the "Request for Comments" (RFC) document
   series.  This archival series is the official publication channel for
   Internet standards documents and other publications of the IESG, IAB,
   and the Internet community.  RFCs can be obtained from a number of
   Interenet hosts using standard Internet applications such as the WWW.

   The RFC series of documents on networking began in 1969 as part of
   the original ARPA wide-area networking (ARPANET) project.  RFCs cover
   a wide range of topics in addition to Internet Standards, from early
   discussion of new research concepts to status memos about the
   Internet.  RFC publication is the direct responsibility of the RFC
   Editor, under the general direction of the IAB.

   The rules for formatting and submitting an RFC are defined in
   [RFC7322].  Every RFC is available in ASCII text.  Some RFCs are also
   available in other formats.  The other versions of an RFC may contain
   material (such as diagrams and figures) that is not present in the
   ASCII version, and it may be formatted differently.

       A stricter requirement applies to standards-track
       specifications: the ASCII text version is the
       definitive reference, and therefore it must be a
       complete and accurate specification of the standard,
       including all necessary diagrams and illustrations.

   The status of Internet protocol and service specifications is
   summarized periodically in an RFC entitled "Internet Official
   Protocol Standards" [STDIDX].  This RFC shows the level of maturity
   and other helpful information for each Internet protocol or service
   specification (see Section 5).

   Some RFCs document Internet Standards.  These RFCs form the 'STD'
   subseries of the RFC series [RFC1311].  When a specification has been
   adopted as an Internet Standard, it is given the additional label
   "STDxxx", but it keeps its RFC number and its place in the RFC series
   (see Section 6.1.2).

   Some RFCs standardize the results of community deliberations about
   statements of principle or conclusions about what is the best way to
   perform some operations or IETF process function.  These RFCs form
   the specification has been adopted as a BCP, it is given the
   additional label "BCPxxx", but it keeps its RFC number and its place
   in the RFC series. (see Section 7)

   Not all specifications of protocols or services for the Internet
   should or will become Internet Standards or BCPs.  Such non-standards
   track specifications are not subject to the rules for Internet
   standardization.  Non-standards track specifications may be published
   directly as "Experimental" or "Informational" RFCs at the discretion
   of the RFC Editor in consultation with the IESG (see Section 6.2).

       It is important to remember that not all RFCs
       are standards track documents, and that not all
       standards track documents reach the level of
       Internet Standard. In the same way, not all RFCs
       which describe current practices have been given
       the review and approval to become BCPs. See
       {{!RFC1796} for further information.

4.2.  Internet-Drafts

   During the development of a specification, draft versions of the
   document are made available for informal review and comment by
   placing them in the IETF's "Internet-Drafts" directory, which is
   replicated on a number of Internet hosts.  This makes an evolving
   working document readily available to a wide audience, facilitating
   the process of review and revision.

   An Internet-Draft that is published as an RFC, or that has remained
   unchanged in the Internet-Drafts directory for more than six months
   without being recommended by the IESG for publication as an RFC, is
   simply removed from the Internet-Drafts directory.  At any time, an
   Internet-Draft may be replaced by a more recent version of the same
   specification, restarting the six-month timeout period.

   An Internet-Draft is NOT a means of "publishing" a specification;
   specifications are published through the RFC mechanism described in
   the previous section.  Internet-Drafts have no formal status, and are
   subject to change or removal at any time.

       Under no circumstances should an Internet-Draft
       be referenced by any paper, report, or Request-
       for-Proposal, nor should a vendor claim compliance
       with an Internet-Draft.

   Note: It is acceptable to reference a standards-track specification
   that may reasonably be expected to be published as an RFC using the
   phrase "Work in Progress" without referencing an Internet-Draft.
   This may also be done in a standards track document itself as long as
   the specification in which the reference is made would stand as a
   complete and understandable document with or without the reference to
   the "Work in Progress".

5.  Internet Standard Specifications

   Specifications subject to the Internet Standards Process fall into
   one of two categories: Technical Specification (TS) and Applicability
   Statement (AS).

5.1.  Technical Specification (TS)

   A Technical Specification is any description of a protocol, service,
   procedure, convention, or format.  It may completely describe all of
   the relevant aspects of its subject, or it may leave one or more
   parameters or options unspecified.  A TS may be completely self-
   contained, or it may incorporate material from other specifications
   by reference to other documents (which might or might not be Internet
   Standards).

   A TS shall include a statement of its scope and the general intent
   for its use (domain of applicability).  Thus, a TS that is inherently
   specific to a particular context shall contain a statement to that
   effect.  However, a TS does not specify requirements for its use
   within the Internet; these requirements, which depend on the
   particular context in which the TS is incorporated by different
   system configurations, are defined by an Applicability Statement.

5.2.  Applicability Statement (AS)

   An Applicability Statement specifies how, and under what
   circumstances, one or more TSs may be applied to support a particular
   Internet capability.  An AS may specify uses for TSs that are not
   Internet Standards, as discussed in Section 9.

   An AS identifies the relevant TSs and the specific way in which they
   are to be combined, and may also specify particular values or ranges
   of TS parameters or subfunctions of a TS protocol that must be
   implemented.  An AS also specifies the circumstances in which the use
   of a particular TS is required, recommended, or elective (see
   Section 5.3).

   An AS may describe particular methods of using a TS in a restricted
   "domain of applicability", such as Internet routers, terminal
   servers, Internet systems that interface to Ethernets, or datagram-
   based database servers.

   The broadest type of AS is a comprehensive conformance specification,
   commonly called a "requirements document", for a particular class of
   Internet systems, such as Internet routers or Internet hosts.

   An AS may not have a higher maturity level in the standards track
   than any standards-track TS on which the AS relies (see Section 6.1).

5.3.  Requirement Levels

   An AS shall apply one of the following "requirement levels" to each
   of the TSs to which it refers:

   *  Required: Implementation of the referenced TS, as specified by the
      AS, is required to achieve minimal conformance.  For example, IP
      and the Internet Control Message Protocl (ICMP) must be
      implemented by all Internet systems using the TCP/IP Protocol
      Suite.

   *  Recommended: Implementation of the referenced TS is not required
      for minimal conformance, but experience and/or generally accepted
      technical wisdom suggest its desirability in the domain of
      applicability of the AS.  Vendors are strongly encouraged to
      include the functions, features, and protocols of Recommended TSs
      in their products, and should omit them only if the omission is
      justified by some special circumstance.  For example, the TELNET
      protocol should be implemented by all systems that would benefit
      from remote access.

   *  Elective: Implementation of the referenced TS is optional within
      the domain of applicability of the AS; that is, the AS creates no
      explicit necessity to apply the TS.  However, a particular vendor
      may decide to implement it, or a particular user may decide that
      it is a necessity in a specific environment.

   As noted in Section 6.1, there are TSs that are not in the standards
   track or that have been retired from the standards track, and are
   therefore not required, recommended, or elective.  Two additional
   "requirement level" designations are available for these TSs:

   *  Limited Use: The TS is considered to be appropriate for use only
      in limited or unique circumstances.  For example, the usage of a
      protocol with the "Experimental" designation should generally be
      limited to those actively involved with the experiment.

   *  Not Recommended: A TS that is considered to be inappropriate for
      general use is labeled "Not Recommended".  This may be because of
      its limited functionality, specialized nature, or historic status.

   Although TSs and ASs are conceptually separate, in practice a
   standards-track document may combine an AS and one or more related
   TSs.  For example, Technical Specifications that are developed
   specifically and exclusively for some particular domain of
   applicability, e.g., for mail server hosts, often contain within a
   single specification all of the relevant AS and TS information.  In
   such cases, no useful purpose would be served by deliberately
   distributing the information among several documents just to preserve
   the formal AS/TS distinction.  However, a TS that is likely to apply
   to more than one domain of applicability should be developed in a
   modular fashion, to facilitate its incorporation by multiple ASs.

   The "Official Protocol Standards" RFC (STD1) lists a general
   requirement level for each TS, using the nomenclature defined in this
   section.  This RFC is updated periodically.  In many cases, more
   detailed descriptions of the requirement levels of particular
   protocols and of individual features of the protocols will be found
   in appropriate ASs.

6.  The Internet Standards Track

   Specifications that are intended to become Internet Standards evolve
   through a set of maturity levels known as the "standards track".
   These maturity levels -- "Proposed Standard" and "Internet Standard"
   -- are defined and discussed in Section 6.1.  The way in which
   specifications move along the standards track is described in
   Section 8.

   Even after a specification has been adopted as an Internet Standard,
   further evolution often occurs based on experience and the
   recognition of new requirements.  The nomenclature and procedures of
   Internet standardization provide for the replacement of old Internet
   Standards with new ones, and the assignment of descriptive labels to
   indicate the status of "retired" Internet Standards.  A set of
   maturity levels is defined in Section 6.2 to cover these and other
   specifications that are not considered to be on the standards track.

6.1.  Standards Track Maturity Levels

   Internet specifications go through stages of development, testing,
   and acceptance.  Within the Internet Standards Process, these stages
   are formally labeled "maturity levels".

   This section describes the maturity levels and the expected
   characteristics of specifications at each level.

6.1.1.  Proposed Standard

   The entry-level maturity for the standards track is "Proposed
   Standard".  A specific action by the IESG is required to move a
   specification onto the standards track at the "Proposed Standard"
   level.

   A Proposed Standard specification is generally stable, has resolved
   known design choices, is believed to be well-understood, has received
   significant community review, and appears to enjoy enough community
   interest to be considered valuable.  However, further experience
   might result in a change or even retraction of the specification
   before it advances.

   Usually, neither implementation nor operational experience is
   required for the designation of a specification as a Proposed
   Standard.  However, such experience is highly desirable, and will
   usually represent a strong argument in favor of a Proposed Standard
   designation.

   The IESG may require implementation and/or operational experience
   prior to granting Proposed Standard status to a specification that
   materially affects the core Internet protocols or that specifies
   behavior that may have significant operational impact on the
   Internet.

   A Proposed Standard should have no known technical omissions with
   respect to the requirements placed upon it.  However, the IESG may
   waive this requirement in order to allow a specification to advance
   to the Proposed Standard state when it is considered to be useful and
   necessary (and timely) even with known technical omissions.

   Implementors should treat Proposed Standards as immature
   specifications.  It is desirable to implement them in order to gain
   experience and to validate, test, and clarify the specification.
   However, since the content of Proposed Standards may be changed if
   problems are found or better solutions are identified, deploying
   implementations of such standards into a disruption-sensitive
   environment is not recommended.

6.1.2.  Internet Standard

   A specification for which significant implementation and successful
   operational experience has been obtained may be elevated to the
   Internet Standard level.  An Internet Standard is characterized by a
   high degree of technical maturity and by a generally held belief that
   the specified protocol or service provides significant benefit to the
   Internet community.

   A specification that reaches the status of Internet Standard is
   assigned a number in the STD series while retaining its RFC number.

6.2.  Non-Standards Track Maturity Levels

   Not every specification is on the standards track.  A specification
   may not be intended to be an Internet Standard, or it may be intended
   for eventual standardization but not yet ready to enter the standards
   track.  A specification may have been superseded by a more recent
   Internet Standard, or have otherwise fallen into disuse or disfavor.

   Specifications that are not on the standards track are labeled with
   one of three "off-track" maturity levels: "Experimental",
   "Informational", or "Historic".  The documents bearing these labels
   are not Internet Standards in any sense.

6.2.1.  Experimental

   The "Experimental" designation typically denotes a specification that
   is part of some research or development effort.  Such a specification
   is published for the general information of the Internet technical
   community and as an archival record of the work, subject only to
   editorial considerations and to verification that there has been
   adequate coordination with the standards process (see below).  An
   Experimental specification may be the output of an organized Internet
   research effort (e.g., a Research Group of the Internet Research Task
   Force) an IETF Working Group, or it may be an individual
   contribution.

6.2.2.  Informational

   An "Informational" specification is published for the general
   information of the Internet community, and does not represent an
   Internet community consensus or recommendation.  The Informational
   designation is intended to provide for the timely publication of a
   very broad range of responsible informational documents from many
   sources, subject only to editorial considerations and to verification
   that there has been adequate coordination with the standards process
   (see Section 6.2.3).

   Specifications that have been prepared outside of the Internet
   community and are not incorporated into the Internet Standards
   Process by any of the provisions of Section 12 may be published as
   Informational RFCs, with the permission of the owner and the
   concurrence of the RFC Editor.

6.2.3.  Procedures for Experimental and Informational RFCs

   Unless they are the result of IETF Working Group action, documents
   intended to be published with Experimental or Informational status
   should be submitted directly to the RFC Editor.  The RFC Editor will
   publish any such documents as Internet-Drafts which have not already
   been so published.  In order to differentiate these Internet-Drafts
   they will be labeled or grouped in the I-D directory so they are
   easily recognizable.  The RFC Editor will wait two weeks after this
   publication for comments before proceeding further.  The RFC Editor
   is expected to exercise his or her judgment concerning the editorial
   suitability of a document for publication with Experimental or
   Informational status, and may refuse to publish a document which, in
   the expert opinion of the RFC Editor, is unrelated to Internet
   activity or falls below the technical and/or editorial standard for
   RFCs.

   To ensure that the non-standards track Experimental and Informational
   designations are not misused to circumvent the Internet Standards
   Process, the IESG and the RFC Editor have agreed that the RFC Editor
   will refer to the IESG any document submitted for Experimental or
   Informational publication which, in the opinion of the RFC Editor,
   may be related to work being done, or expected to be done, within the
   IETF community.  The IESG shall review such a referred document
   within a reasonable period of time, and recommend either that it be
   published as originally submitted or referred to the IETF as a
   contribution to the Internet Standards Process.

   If (a) the IESG recommends that the document be brought within the
   IETF and progressed within the IETF context, but the author declines
   to do so, or (b) the IESG considers that the document proposes
   something that conflicts with, or is actually inimical to, an
   established IETF effort, the document may still be published as an
   Experimental or Informational RFC.  In these cases, however, the IESG
   may insert appropriate "disclaimer" text into the RFC either in or
   immediately following the "Status of this Memo" section in order to
   make the circumstances of its publication clear to readers.

   Documents proposed for Experimental and Informational RFCs by IETF
   Working Groups go through IESG review.  The review is initiated using
   the process described in Section 8.1.1.

6.2.4.  Historic

   A specification that has been superseded by a more recent
   specification or is for any other reason considered to be obsolete is
   assigned to the "Historic" level.  (Purists have suggested that the
   word should be "Historical"; however, at this point the use of
   "Historic" is historical.)

   Note: Standards track specifications normally must not depend on
   other standards track specifications which are at a lower maturity
   level or on non standards track specifications other than referenced
   specifications from other standards bodies.  (See Section 9.)

7.  Best Current Practice (BCP) RFCs

   The BCP subseries of the RFC series is designed to be a way to
   standardize practices and the results of community deliberations.  A
   BCP document is subject to the same basic set of procedures as
   standards track documents and thus is a vehicle by which the IETF
   community can define and ratify the community's best current thinking
   on a statement of principle or on what is believed to be the best way
   to perform some operations or IETF process function.

   Historically Internet standards have generally been concerned with
   the technical specifications for hardware and software required for
   computer communication across interconnected networks.  However,
   since the Internet itself is composed of networks operated by a great
   variety of organizations, with diverse goals and rules, good user
   service requires that the operators and administrators of the
   Internet follow some common guidelines for policies and operations.
   While these guidelines are generally different in scope and style
   from protocol standards, their establishment needs a similar process
   for consensus building.

   While it is recognized that entities such as the IAB and IESG are
   composed of individuals who may participate, as individuals, in the
   technical work of the IETF, it is also recognized that the entities
   themselves have an existence as leaders in the community.  As leaders
   in the Internet technical community, these entities should have an
   outlet to propose ideas to stimulate work in a particular area, to
   raise the community's sensitivity to a certain issue, to make a
   statement of architectural principle, or to communicate their
   thoughts on other matters.  The BCP subseries creates a smoothly
   structured way for these management entities to insert proposals into
   the consensus-building machinery of the IETF while gauging the
   community's view of that issue.

   Finally, the BCP series may be used to document the operation of the
   IETF itself.  For example, this document defines the IETF Standards
   Process and is published as a BCP.

7.1.  BCP Review Process

   Unlike standards-track documents, the mechanisms described in BCPs
   are not well suited to the phased roll-in nature of the three stage
   standards track and instead generally only make sense for full and
   immediate instantiation.

   The BCP process is similar to that for proposed standards.  The BCP
   is submitted to the IESG for review, (see Section 8.1.1) and the
   existing review process applies, including a Last-Call on the IETF
   Announce mailing list.  However, once the IESG has approved the
   document, the process ends and the document is published.  The
   resulting document is viewed as having the technical approval of the
   IETF.

   Specifically, a document to be considered for the status of BCP must
   undergo the procedures outlined in Section 8.1, and Section 8.4 of
   this document.  The BCP process may be appealed according to the
   procedures in Section 8.5.

   Because BCPs are meant to express community consensus but are arrived
   at more quickly than standards, BCPs require particular care.
   Specifically, BCPs should not be viewed simply as stronger
   Informational RFCs, but rather should be viewed as documents suitable
   for a content different from Informational RFCs.

   A specification, or group of specifications, that has, or have been
   approved as a BCP is assigned a number in the BCP series while
   retaining its RFC number(s).

8.  The Internet Standards Process

   The mechanics of the Internet Standards Process involve decisions of
   the IESG concerning the elevation of a specification onto the
   standards track or the movement of a standards-track specification
   from one maturity level to another.  Although a number of reasonably
   objective criteria (described below and in Section 6) are available
   to guide the IESG in making a decision to move a specification onto,
   along, or off the standards track, there is no algorithmic guarantee
   of elevation to or progression along the standards track for any
   specification.  The experienced collective judgment of the IESG
   concerning the technical quality of a specification proposed for
   elevation to or advancement in the standards track is an essential
   component of the decision-making process.

8.1.  Standards Actions

   A "standards action" -- entering a particular specification into,
   advancing it within, or removing it from, the standards track -- must
   be approved by the IESG.

8.1.1.  Initiation of Action

   A specification that is intended to enter or advance in the Internet
   standards track shall first be posted as an Internet-Draft (see
   Section 4.2) unless it has not changed since publication as an RFC.
   It shall remain as an Internet-Draft for a period of time, not less
   than two weeks, that permits useful community review, after which a
   recommendation for action may be initiated.

   A standards action is initiated by a recommendation by the IETF
   Working group responsible for a specification to its Area Director,
   copied to the IETF Secretariat or, in the case of a specification not
   associated with a Working Group, a recommendation by an individual to
   the IESG.

   For classification as an Internet Standard, the request for
   reclassification must include an explanation of how the following
   criteria have been met:

   1.  There are at least two independent interoperating implementations
       with widespread deployment and successful operational experience.
       Although not required by the IETF Standards Process, [RFC5657]
       can be helpful to conduct interoperability testing.

   2.  There are no errata against the specification that would cause a
       new implementation to fail to interoperate with deployed ones.

   3.  There are no unused features in the specification that greatly
       increase implementation complexity.

   4.  If the technology required to implement the specification
       requires patented or otherwise controlled technology, then the
       set of implementations must demonstrate at least two independent,
       separate and successful uses of the licensing process.

8.1.2.  IESG Review and Approval

   The IESG shall determine whether or not a specification submitted to
   it according to Section 8.1.1 satisfies the applicable criteria for
   the recommended action (see Section 6.1 and Section 6.2), and shall
   in addition determine whether or not the technical quality and
   clarity of the specification is consistent with that expected for the
   maturity level to which the specification is recommended.

   The IESG is not bound by the action recommended when the
   specification was submitted.  For example, the IESG may decide to
   consider the specification for publication in a different category
   than that requested.  If the IESG determines this before the Last-
   Call is issued then the Last-Call should reflect the IESG's view.
   The IESG could also decide to change the publication category based
   on the response to a Last-Call.  If this decision would result in a
   specification being published at a "higher" level than the original
   Last-Call was for, a new Last-Call should be issued indicating the
   IESG recommendation.  In addition, the IESG may decide to recommend
   the formation of a new Working Group in the case of significant
   controversy in response to a Last-Call for specification not
   originating from an IETF Working Group.

   In order to obtain all of the information necessary to make these
   determinations, particularly when the specification is considered by
   the IESG to be extremely important in terms of its potential impact
   on the Internet or on the suite of Internet protocols, the IESG may,
   at its discretion, commission an independent technical review of the
   specification.

   The IESG will send notice to the IETF of the pending IESG
   consideration of the document(s) to permit a final review by the
   general Internet community.  This "Last-Call" notification shall be
   via electronic mail to the IETF Announce mailing list.  Comments on a
   Last-Call shall be accepted from anyone, and should be sent as
   directed in the Last-Call announcement.

   For a Proposed Standard, the Last-Call period shall be no shorter
   than two weeks except in those cases where the proposed standards
   action was not initiated by an IETF Working Group, in which case the
   Last-Call period shall be no shorter than four weeks.  If the IESG
   believes that the community interest would be served by allowing more
   time for comment, it may decide on a longer Last-Call period or to
   explicitly lengthen a current Last-Call period.

   For an Internet Standard, the IESG will perform a review and
   consideration of any errata that have been filed.  If they do not
   believe any of these should hold up the advancement, then the IESG,
   in an IETF-wide Last Call of at least four weeks, confirms informs
   the community of their intent to advance a document from Proposed
   Standard to Internet Standard.

   If there is consensus for reclassification, the RFC will be
   reclassified without publication of a new RFC.

   In a timely fashion after the expiration of the Last-Call period, the
   IESG shall make its final determination of whether or not to approve
   the standards action, and shall notify the IETF of its decision via
   electronic mail to the IETF Announce mailing list.

8.1.3.  Publication

   If a standards action is approved, notification is sent to the RFC
   Editor and copied to the IETF with instructions to publish the
   specification as an RFC.  The specification shall at that point be
   removed from the Internet-Drafts directory.

   An official summary of standards actions completed and pending shall
   appear in each issue of ISOC's newsletter.  This shall constitute the
   "publication of record" for Internet standards actions.

   The RFC Editor shall publish periodically an "Internet Official
   Protocol Standards" RFC [STDIDX], summarizing the status of all
   Internet protocol and service specifications.

8.2.  Advancing in the Standards Track

   The procedure described in Section 8.1 is followed for each action
   that attends the advancement of a specification along the standards
   track.

   A specification shall remain at the Proposed Standard level for at
   least six months.  This minimum period is intended to ensure adequate
   opportunity for community review without severely impacting
   timeliness.  The interval shall be measured from the date of
   publication of the corresponding RFC(s), or, if the action does not
   result in RFC publication, the date of the announcement of the IESG
   approval of the action.

   A specification may be (indeed, is likely to be) revised as it
   advances through the standards track.  At each stage, the IESG shall
   determine the scope and significance of the revision to the
   specification, and, if necessary and appropriate, modify the
   recommended action.  Minor revisions are expected, but a significant
   revision may require that the specification accumulate more
   experience at its current maturity level before progressing.
   Finally, if the specification has been changed very significantly,
   the IESG may recommend that the revision be treated as a new
   document, re- entering the standards track at the beginning.

   Change of status shall result in republication of the specification
   as an RFC, except in the rare case that there have been no changes at
   all in the specification since the last publication.  Generally,
   desired changes will be "batched" for incorporation at the next level
   in the standards track.  However, deferral of changes to the next
   standards action on the specification will not always be possible or
   desirable; for example, an important typographical error, or a
   technical error that does not represent a change in overall function
   of the specification, may need to be corrected immediately.  In such
   cases, the IESG or RFC Editor may be asked to republish the RFC (with
   a new number) with corrections, and this will not reset the minimum
   time-at-level clock.

8.3.  Revising a Standard

   A new version of an established Internet Standard must progress
   through the full Internet standardization process as if it were a
   completely new specification.  Once the new version has reached the
   Standard level, it will usually replace the previous version, which
   will be moved to Historic status.  However, in some cases both
   versions may remain as Internet Standards to honor the requirements
   of an installed base.  In this situation, the relationship between
   the previous and the new versions must be explicitly stated in the
   text of the new version or in another appropriate document (e.g., an
   Applicability Statement; see Section 5.2).

8.4.  Retiring a Standard

   As the technology changes and matures, it is possible for a new
   Standard specification to be so clearly superior technically that one
   or more existing standards track specifications for the same function
   should be retired.  In this case, or when it is felt for some other
   reason that an existing standards track specification should be
   retired, the IESG shall approve a change of status of the old
   specification(s) to Historic.  This recommendation shall be issued
   with the same Last-Call and notification procedures used for any
   other standards action.  A request to retire an existing standard can
   originate from a Working Group, an Area Director or some other
   interested party.

8.5.  Conflict Resolution and Appeals

   Disputes are possible at various stages during the IETF process.  As
   much as possible the process is designed so that compromises can be
   made, and genuine consensus achieved, however there are times when
   even the most reasonable and knowledgeable people are unable to
   agree.  To achieve the goals of openness and fairness, such conflicts
   must be resolved by a process of open review and discussion.  This
   section specifies the procedures that shall be followed to deal with
   Internet standards issues that cannot be resolved through the normal
   processes whereby IETF Working Groups and other Internet Standards
   Process participants ordinarily reach consensus.

8.5.1.  Working Group Disputes

   An individual (whether a participant in the relevant Working Group or
   not) may disagree with a Working Group recommendation based on his or
   her belief that either (a) his or her own views have not been
   adequately considered by the Working Group, or (b) the Working Group
   has made an incorrect technical choice which places the quality and/
   or integrity of the Working Group's product(s) in significant
   jeopardy.  The first issue is a difficulty with Working Group
   process; the latter is an assertion of technical error.  These two
   types of disagreement are quite different, but both are handled by
   the same process of review.

   A person who disagrees with a Working Group recommendation shall
   always first discuss the matter with the Working Group's chair(s),
   who may involve other members of the Working Group (or the Working
   Group as a whole) in the discussion.

   If the disagreement cannot be resolved in this way, any of the
   parties involved may bring it to the attention of the Area
   Director(s) for the area in which the Working Group is chartered.
   The Area Director(s) shall attempt to resolve the dispute.

   If the disagreement cannot be resolved by the Area Director(s) any of
   the parties involved may then appeal to the IESG as a whole.  The
   IESG shall then review the situation and attempt to resolve it in a
   manner of its own choosing.

   If the disagreement is not resolved to the satisfaction of the
   parties at the IESG level, any of the parties involved may appeal the
   decision to the IAB.  The IAB shall then review the situation and
   attempt to resolve it in a manner of its own choosing.

   The IAB decision is final with respect to the question of whether or
   not the Internet standards procedures have been followed and with
   respect to all questions of technical merit.

8.5.2.  Process Failures

   This document sets forward procedures required to be followed to
   ensure openness and fairness of the Internet Standards Process, and
   the technical viability of the standards created.  The IESG is the
   principal agent of the IETF for this purpose, and it is the IESG that
   is charged with ensuring that the required procedures have been
   followed, and that any necessary prerequisites to a standards action
   have been met.

   If an individual should disagree with an action taken by the IESG in
   this process, that person should first discuss the issue with the
   ISEG Chair.  If the IESG Chair is unable to satisfy the complainant
   then the IESG as a whole should re-examine the action taken, along
   with input from the complainant, and determine whether any further
   action is needed.  The IESG shall issue a report on its review of the
   complaint to the IETF.

   Should the complainant not be satisfied with the outcome of the IESG
   review, an appeal may be lodged to the IAB.  The IAB shall then
   review the situation and attempt to resolve it in a manner of its own
   choosing and report to the IETF on the outcome of its review.

   If circumstances warrant, the IAB may direct that an IESG decision be
   annulled, and the situation shall then be as it was before the IESG
   decision was taken.  The IAB may also recommend an action to the
   IESG, or make such other recommendations as it deems fit.  The IAB
   may not, however, pre-empt the role of the IESG by issuing a decision
   which only the IESG is empowered to make.

   The IAB decision is final with respect to the question of whether or
   not the Internet standards procedures have been followed.

8.5.3.  Questions of Applicable Procedure

   Further recourse is available only in cases in which the procedures
   themselves (i.e., the procedures described in this document) are
   claimed to be inadequate or insufficient to the protection of the
   rights of all parties in a fair and open Internet Standards Process.
   Claims on this basis may be made to the ISOC Board of Trustees.  The
   President of the ISOC shall acknowledge such an appeal within two
   weeks, and shall at the time of acknowledgment advise the petitioner
   of the expected duration of the Trustees' review of the appeal.  The
   Trustees shall review the situation in a manner of its own choosing
   and report to the IETF on the outcome of its review.

   The Trustees' decision upon completion of their review shall be final
   with respect to all aspects of the dispute.

8.5.4.  Appeals Procedure

   All appeals must include a detailed and specific description of the
   facts of the dispute.

   All appeals must be initiated within two months of the public
   knowledge of the action or decision to be challenged.

   At all stages of the appeals process, the individuals or bodies
   responsible for making the decisions have the discretion to define
   the specific procedures they will follow in the process of making
   their decision.

   In all cases a decision concerning the disposition of the dispute,
   and the communication of that decision to the parties involved, must
   be accomplished within a reasonable period of time.

   NOTE: These procedures intentionally and explicitly do not establish
   a fixed maximum time period that shall be considered "reasonable" in
   all cases.  The Internet Standards Process places a premium on
   consensus and efforts to achieve it, and deliberately foregoes
   deterministically swift execution of procedures in favor of a
   latitude within which more genuine technical agreements may be
   reached.

9.  External Standards and Specifications

   Many standards groups other than the IETF create and publish
   standards documents for network protocols and services.  When these
   external specifications play an important role in the Internet, it is
   desirable to reach common agreements on their usage -- i.e., to
   establish Internet Standards relating to these external
   specifications.

   There are two categories of external specifications:

   *  Open Standards: Various national and international standards
      bodies, such as ANSI, ISO, IEEE, and ITU-T, develop a variety of
      protocol and service specifications that are similar to Technical
      Specifications defined here.  National and international groups
      also publish "implementors' agreements" that are analogous to
      Applicability Statements, capturing a body of implementation-
      specific detail concerned with the practical application of their
      standards.  All of these are considered to be "open external
      standards" for the purposes of the Internet Standards Process.

   *  Other Specifications: Other proprietary specifications that have
      come to be widely used in the Internet may be treated by the
      Internet community as if they were a "standards".  Such a
      specification is not generally developed in an open fashion, is
      typically proprietary, and is controlled by the vendor, vendors,
      or organization that produced it.

9.1.  Use of External Specifications

   To avoid conflict between competing versions of a specification, the
   Internet community will not standardize a specification that is
   simply an "Internet version" of an existing external specification
   unless an explicit cooperative arrangement to do so has been made.
   However, there are several ways in which an external specification
   that is important for the operation and/or evolution of the Internet
   may be adopted for Internet use.

9.1.1.  Incorporation of an Open Standard

   An Internet Standard TS or AS may incorporate an open external
   standard by reference.  For example, many Internet Standards
   incorporate by reference the ANSI standard character set "US-ASCII"
   [US-ASCII].  Whenever possible, the referenced specification shall be
   available without restriction or undue fee using standard Internet
   applications such as the WWW.

9.1.2.  Incorporation of Other Specifications

   Other proprietary specifications may be incorporated by reference to
   a version of the specification as long as the proprietor meets the
   requirements of Section 12.  If the other proprietary specification
   is not widely and readily available, the IESG may request that it be
   published as an Informational RFC.

   The IESG generally should not favor a particular proprietary
   specification over technically equivalent and competing
   specification(s) by making any incorporated vendor specification
   "required" or "recommended".

9.1.3.  Assumption

   An IETF Working Group may start from an external specification and
   develop it into an Internet specification.  This is acceptable if (1)
   the specification is provided to the Working Group in compliance with
   the requirements of Section 12, and (2) change control has been
   conveyed to IETF by the original developer of the specification for
   the specification or for specifications derived from the original
   specification.

10.  Notices and Record Keeping

   Each of the organizations involved in the development and approval of
   Internet Standards shall publicly announce, and shall maintain a
   publicly accessible record of, every activity in which it engages, to
   the extent that the activity represents the prosecution of any part
   of the Internet Standards Process.  For purposes of this section, the
   organizations involved in the development and approval of Internet
   Standards includes the IETF, the IESG, the IAB, all IETF Working
   Groups, and the Internet Society Board of Trustees.

   For IETF and Working Group meetings announcements shall be made by
   electronic mail to the IETF Announce mailing list and shall be made
   sufficiently far in advance of the activity to permit all interested
   parties to effectively participate.  The announcement shall contain
   (or provide pointers to) all of the information that is necessary to
   support the participation of any interested individual.  In the case
   of a meeting, for example, the announcement shall include an agenda
   that specifies the standards- related issues that will be discussed.

   The formal record of an organization's standards-related activity
   shall include at least the following:

   *  The charter of the organization (or a defining document equivalent
      to a charter);

   *  Complete and accurate minutes of meetings;

   *  The archives of Working Group electronic mail mailing lists; and

   *  All written contributions from participants that pertain to the
      organization's standards-related activity.

   As a practical matter, the formal record of all Internet Standards
   Process activities is maintained by the IETF Secretariat, and is the
   responsibility of the IETF Secretariat except that each IETF Working
   Group is expected to maintain their own email list archive and must
   make a best effort to ensure that all traffic is captured and
   included in the archives.  Also, the Working Group chair is
   responsible for providing the IETF Secretariat with complete and
   accurate minutes of all Working Group meetings.  Internet-Drafts that
   have been removed (for any reason) from the Internet-Drafts
   directories shall be archived by the IETF Secretariat for the sole
   purpose of preserving an historical record of Internet standards
   activity and thus are not retrievable except in special
   circumstances.

11.  Varying the Process

   This document, which sets out the rules and procedures by which
   Internet Standards and related documents are made is itself a product
   of the Internet Standards Process (as a BCP, as described in
   Section 7.)  It replaces a previous version, and in time, is likely
   itself to be replaced.

   While, when published, this document represents the community's view
   of the proper and correct process to follow, and requirements to be
   met, to allow for the best possible Internet Standards and BCPs, it
   cannot be assumed that this will always remain the case.  From time
   to time there may be a desire to update it, by replacing it with a
   new version.  Updating this document uses the same open procedures as
   are used for any other BCP.

   In addition, there may be situations where following the procedures
   leads to a deadlock about a specific specification, or there may be
   situations where the procedures provide no guidance.  In these cases
   it may be appropriate to invoke the variance procedure described
   below.

11.1.  The Variance Procedure

   Upon the recommendation of the responsible IETF Working Group (or, if
   no Working Group is constituted, upon the recommendation of an ad hoc
   committee), the IESG may enter a particular specification into, or
   advance it within, the standards track even though some of the
   requirements of this document have not or will not be met.  The IESG
   may approve such a variance, however, only if it first determines
   that the likely benefits to the Internet community are likely to
   outweigh any costs to the Internet community that result from
   noncompliance with the requirements in this document.  In exercising
   this discretion, the IESG shall at least consider (a) the technical
   merit of the specification, (b) the possibility of achieving the
   goals of the Internet Standards Process without granting a variance,
   (c) alternatives to the granting of a variance, (d) the collateral
   and precedential effects of granting a variance, and (e) the IESG's
   ability to craft a variance that is as narrow as possible.  In
   determining whether to approve a variance, the IESG has discretion to
   limit the scope of the variance to particular parts of this document
   and to impose such additional restrictions or limitations as it
   determines appropriate to protect the interests of the Internet
   community.

   The proposed variance must detail the problem perceived, explain the
   precise provision of this document which is causing the need for a
   variance, and the results of the IESG's considerations including
   consideration of points (a) through (d) in the previous paragraph.
   The proposed variance shall be issued as an Internet Draft.  The IESG
   shall then issue an extended Last-Call, of no less than 4 weeks, to
   allow for community comment upon the proposal.

   In a timely fashion after the expiration of the Last-Call period, the
   IESG shall make its final determination of whether or not to approve
   the proposed variance, and shall notify the IETF of its decision via
   electronic mail to the IETF Announce mailing list.  If the variance
   is approved it shall be forwarded to the RFC Editor with a request
   that it be published as a BCP.

   This variance procedure is for use when a one-time waving of some
   provision of this document is felt to be required.  Permanent changes
   to this document shall be accomplished through the normal BCP
   process.

   The appeals process in Section 8.5 applies to this process.

11.2.  Exclusions

   No use of this procedure may lower any specified delays, nor exempt
   any proposal from the requirements of openness, fairness, or
   consensus, nor from the need to keep proper records of the meetings
   and mailing list discussions.

   Specifically, the following sections of this document must not be
   subject of a variance: Section 7.1, Section 8.1, Section 8.1.1 (first
   paragraph), Section 8.1.2, Section 8.3 (first sentence), Section 8.5
   and Section 11.

12.  Intellectual Property Rights

12.1.  Background

   In all matters of copyright and document procedures, the intent is to
   benefit the Internet community and the public at large, while
   respecting the legitimate rights of others.

   Under the laws of most countries and current international treaties
   (for example the "Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and
   Artistic Work" [BERNE]), authors obtain numerous rights in the works
   they produce automatically upon producing them.  These rights include
   copyrights, moral rights, and other rights.  In many cases, if the
   author produces a work within the scope of his or her employment,
   most of those rights are usually assigned to the employer, either by
   operation of law or, in many cases, under contract.  (The Berne
   Convention names some rights as "inalienable", which means that the
   author retains them in all cases.)

   In order for Contributions to be used within the IETF Standards
   Process, including when they are published as Internet-Drafts or
   RFCs, certain limited rights must be granted to the IETF Trust, which
   then grants the necessary rights to the IETF.  In addition,
   Contributors must make representations to the IETF Trust and the IETF
   regarding their ability to grant these rights.

   [RFC8179] deals with rights, including possible patent rights, in
   technologies developed or specified as part of the IETF Standards
   Process.  This document is not intended to address those issues.

12.2.  Exposition of Why These Procedures Are the Way They Are

   This memo does not retroactively obtain additional rights from
   Contributions that predate the date that the IETF Trust announces the
   adoption of these procedures.

12.2.1.  Rights Granted in Contributions

   The IETF Trust and the IETF must obtain the right to publish an IETF
   Contribution as an RFC or an Internet-Draft from the Contributors.

   A primary objective of this policy is to obtain from the document
   authors only the non-exclusive rights that are needed to develop and
   publish IETF Documents and to use IETF Contributions in the IETF
   Standards Process and potentially elsewhere.

   The authors retain all other rights, but cannot withdraw the above
   rights from the IETF Trust and the IETF.

   It is important to note that under this document, Contributors are
   required to grant certain rights to the IETF Trust (see
   Section 12.2.9), which holds all IETF-related intellectual property
   on behalf of the IETF community.  The IETF Trust will, in turn, grant
   a sublicense of these rights to all IETF participants for use in the
   IETF Standards Process (see Section 5.4.).  This sublicense is
   necessary for the standards development work of the IETF to continue.
   In addition, the IETF Trust may grant certain other sublicenses of
   the rights that it is granted under this document.  In granting such
   other sublicenses, the IETF Trust will be guided and bound by
   documents such as [RFC5377].

12.2.2.  Rights to Use Contributions

   It is important that the IETF receive assurances from all
   Contributors that they have the authority to grant the IETF the
   rights that they claim to grant because, under the laws of most
   countries and applicable international treaties, copyright rights
   come into existence when a work of authorship is created (but see
   Section 12.2.5 regarding public domain documents), and the IETF
   cannot make use of IETF Contributions if it does not have sufficient
   rights with respect to these copyright rights.  The IETF and its
   participants would run a greater risk of liability to the owners of
   these rights without this assurance.  To this end, the IETF asks
   Contributors to give the assurances in Section 12.2.12.  These
   assurances are requested, however, only to the extent of the
   Contributor's reasonable and personal knowledge as defined above.

12.2.3.  Right to Produce Derivative Works

   The IETF needs to be able to evolve IETF Documents in response to
   experience gained in the deployment of the technologies described in
   such IETF Documents, to incorporate developments in research, and to
   react to changing conditions on the Internet and other IP networks.
   The IETF may also decide to permit others to develop derivative works
   based on Contributions.  In order to do this, the IETF must be able
   to produce derivatives of its documents; thus, the IETF must obtain
   the right from Contributors to produce derivative works.  Note that
   the right to produce translations is required before any Contribution
   can be published as an RFC, to ensure the widest possible
   distribution of the material in RFCs.  The right to produce
   derivative works, in addition to translations, is required for all
   IETF Standards Track documents and for most IETF non-Standards Track
   documents.  There are two exceptions to this requirement: documents
   describing proprietary technologies and documents that are
   republications of the work of other standards organizations.

   The right to produce derivative works must be granted in order for an
   IETF working group to accept a Contribution as a working group
   document or otherwise work on it.  For non-working group
   Contributions where the Contributor requests publication as a
   Standards Track RFC, the right to produce derivative works must be
   granted before the IESG will issue an IETF Last Call and, for most
   non-Standards Track, non-working group Contributions, before the IESG
   will consider the Internet-Draft for publication.  Occasionally a
   Contributor may not want to grant publication rights or the right to
   produce derivative works before finding out if a Contribution has
   been accepted for development in the IETF Standards Process.  In
   these cases, the Contributor may include a limitation on the right to
   make derivative works in the form specified in the Legend
   Instructions.  A working group can discuss the Contribution with the
   aim to decide if it should become a working group document, even
   though the right to produce derivative works or to publish the
   Contribution as an RFC has not yet been granted.  However, if the
   Contribution is accepted for development, the Contributor must
   resubmit the Contribution without the limitation notices before a
   working group can formally adopt the Contribution as a working group
   document.  The IETF Trust may establish different policies for
   granting sublicenses with respect to different types of Contributions
   and content within Contributions (such as executable code versus
   descriptive text or references to third-party materials).  The IETF
   Trust's policies concerning the granting of sublicenses to make
   derivative works will be guided by [RFC5377].

   The IETF has historically encouraged organizations to publish details
   of their technologies, even when the technologies are proprietary,
   because understanding how existing technology is being used helps
   when developing new technology.  But organizations that publish
   information about proprietary technologies are frequently not willing
   to have the IETF produce revisions of the technologies and then
   possibly claim that the IETF version is the "new version" of the
   organization's technology.  Organizations that feel this way can
   specify that a Contribution be published with the other rights
   granted under this document but may withhold the right to produce
   derivative works other than translations.

   In addition, IETF Documents frequently make normative references to
   standards or recommendations developed by other standards
   organizations.  Since the publications of some standards
   organizations are not public documents, it can be quite helpful to
   the IETF to republish, with the permission of the other standards
   organization, some of these documents as RFCs so that the IETF
   community can have open access to them to better understand what they
   are referring to.  In these cases, the RFCs can be published without
   the right for the IETF to produce derivative works.  In both of the
   above cases, in which the production of derivative works is excluded,
   the Contributor must include a special legend in the Contribution, as
   specified in the Legend Instructions, in order to notify IETF
   participants about this restriction.

12.2.4.  Rights to Use Trademarks

   Contributors may wish to seek trademark or service mark protection on
   any terms that are coined or used in their Contributions.  The IETF
   makes no judgment about the validity of any such trademark rights.
   However, the IETF requires each Contributor, under the licenses
   described in Section 12.2.9 below, to grant the IETF Trust a
   perpetual license to use any such trademarks or service marks solely
   in exercising rights to reproduce, publish, discuss, and modify the
   IETF Contribution.  This license does not authorize the IETF or
   others to use any trademark or service mark in connection with any
   product or service offering.

12.2.5.  Contributions Not Subject to Copyright

   Certain documents, including those produced by the U.S. government
   and those which are in the public domain, may not be protected by the
   same copyright and other legal rights as other documents.
   Nevertheless, we ask each Contributor to grant to the IETF the same
   rights he or she would grant, and to make the same representations,
   as though the IETF Contribution were protected by the same legal
   rights as other documents, and as though the Contributor could be
   able to grant these rights.  We ask for these grants and
   representations only to the extent that the Contribution may be
   protected.  We believe they are necessary to protect the ISOC, the
   IETF Trust, the IETF, the IETF Standards Process, and all IETF
   participants, and because the IETF does not have the resources or
   wherewithal to make any independent investigation as to the actual
   proprietary status of any document submitted to it.

12.2.6.  Copyright in RFCs

   As noted above, Contributors to the IETF (or their employers) retain
   ownership of the copyright in their Contributions.  This includes
   Internet-Drafts and all other Contributions made within the IETF
   Standards Process (e.g., via e-mail, oral comment, and otherwise).
   However, it is important that the IETF (through the IETF Trust) own
   the copyright in documents that are published as RFCs (other than
   Informational RFCs and RFCs that are submitted as RFC Editor
   Contributions).  Ownership of the copyright in an RFC does not
   diminish the Contributors' rights in their underlying contributions,
   but it does prevent anyone other than the IETF Trust (and its
   licensees) from republishing or modifying an RFC in RFC format.  In
   this respect, Contributors are treated the same as anybody else:
   though they may extract and republish their own Contributions without
   limitation, they may not do so in the RFC format used by the IETF.
   And while this principle (which is included in Section 12.2.15 below)
   may appear to be new to the IETF, it actually reflects historical
   practice and has been observed for many years through the inclusion
   of an ISOC or IETF Trust copyright notice on all RFC documents since
   the publication of [RFC2026].

12.2.7.  General Policy

   By submission of a Contribution, each person actually submitting the
   Contribution and each named co-Contributor is deemed to have read and
   understood the rules and requirements set forth in this document.
   Each Contributor is deemed, by the act of submitting a Contribution,
   to enter into a legally-binding agreement to comply with the terms
   and conditions set forth in this document.

   The Contributor is further deemed to have agreed that he/she has
   obtained the necessary permissions to enter into such an agreement
   from any party that the Contributor reasonably and personally knows
   may have rights in the Contribution, including, but not limited to,
   the Contributor's sponsor or employer.

   No further acknowledgment, signature, or other action is required to
   bind a Contributor to these terms and conditions.  The operation of
   the IETF and the work conducted by its many participants is dependent
   on such agreement by each Contributor, and each IETF participant
   expressly relies on the agreement of each Contributor to the terms
   and conditions set forth in this document.

12.2.8.  Confidentiality Obligations

   No information or document that is subject to any requirement of
   confidentiality or any restriction on its dissemination may be
   submitted as a Contribution or otherwise considered in any part of
   the IETF Standards Process, and there must be no assumption of any
   confidentiality obligation with respect to any Contribution.  Each
   Contributor agrees that any statement in a Contribution, whether
   generated automatically or otherwise, that states or implies that the
   Contribution is confidential or subject to any privilege, can be
   disregarded for all purposes, and will be of no force or effect.

12.2.9.  Rights Granted by Contributors to the IETF Trust

   To the extent that a Contribution or any portion thereof is protected
   by copyright or other rights of authorship, the Contributor and each
   named co-Contributor grant a perpetual, irrevocable, non-exclusive,
   royalty-free, world-wide, sublicensable right and license to the IETF
   Trust under all such copyrights and other rights in the Contribution:

   1.  To copy, publish, display, and distribute the Contribution, in
       whole or in part,

   2.  To prepare translations of the Contribution into languages other
       than English, in whole or in part, and to copy, publish, display,
       and distribute such translations or portions thereof,

   3.  To modify or prepare derivative works (in addition to
       translations) that are based on or incorporate all or part of the
       Contribution, and to copy, publish, display, and distribute such
       derivative works, or portions thereof unless explicitly
       disallowed in the notices contained in a Contribution (in the
       form specified by the Legend Instructions), and

   4.  To reproduce any trademarks, service marks, or trade names which
       are included in the Contribution solely in connection with the
       reproduction, distribution, or publication of the Contribution
       and derivative works thereof as permitted by this section,
       provided that when reproducing Contributions, trademark and
       service mark identifiers used in the Contribution, including TM
       and (R), will be preserved.

12.2.10.  Sublicenses by the IETF Trust

   The IETF Trust will sublicense the rights granted to it under
   Section 12.2.9 to all IETF participants for use within the IETF
   Standards Process.  This license is expressly granted under a license
   agreement issued by the IETF Trust, which can be found at Trust Legal
   Provisions (https://trustee.ietf.org/documents/trust-legal-
   provisions/).

   This license is expressly granted under a license agreement issued by
   the IETF Trust and must contain a pointer to the full IETF Trust
   agreement.

   In addition, the IETF Trust may grant additional sublicenses of the
   licenses granted to it hereunder.  In doing so, the IETF Trust will
   comply with the guidance provided under [RFC5377].

12.2.11.  No Patent License

   The licenses granted in Section 12.2.9 shall not be deemed to grant
   any right under any patent, patent application, or other similar
   intellectual property right disclosed by the Contributor under
   [RFC8179] or otherwise.

12.2.12.  Representations and Warranties

   With respect to each Contribution, each Contributor represents that,
   to the best of his or her knowledge and ability:

   *  The Contribution properly acknowledges all Contributors, including
      Indirect Contributors.

   *  No information in the Contribution is confidential, and the IETF,
      IETF Trust, ISOC, and its affiliated organizations may freely
      disclose any information in the Contribution.

   *  There are no limits to the Contributor's ability to make the
      grants, acknowledgments, and agreements herein that are reasonably
      and personally known to the Contributor.

   *  The Contributor has not intentionally included in the Contribution
      any material that is defamatory or untrue or which is illegal
      under the laws of the jurisdiction in which the Contributor has
      his or her principal place of business or residence.

   *  All trademarks, trade names, service marks, and other proprietary
      names used in the Contribution that are reasonably and personally
      known to the Contributor are clearly designated as such where
      reasonable.

12.2.13.  No Duty to Publish

   The Contributor, and each named co-Contributor, acknowledges that the
   IETF has no duty to publish or otherwise use or disseminate any
   Contribution.  The IETF reserves the right to withdraw or cease using
   any Contribution that does not comply with the requirements of this
   section.

12.2.14.  Trademarks

   Contributors who claim trademark rights in terms used in their IETF
   Contributions are requested to state specifically what conditions
   apply to implementers of the technology relative to the use of such
   trademarks.  Such statements should be submitted in the same way as
   is done for other intellectual property claims.  (See [RFC8179],
   Section 5.)

12.2.15.  Copyright in RFCs

   Subject to each Contributor's (or its sponsor's) ownership of its
   underlying Contributions as described in Section 12.2.12 (which
   ownership is qualified by the irrevocable licenses granted under
   Section 12.2.9), each Contributor hereby acknowledges that the
   copyright in any RFC in which such Contribution is included, other
   than an RFC that is an RFC Editor Contribution, shall be owned by the
   IETF Trust.  Such Contributor shall be deemed to assign to the IETF
   Trust such Contributor's copyright interest in the collective work
   constituting such RFC upon the submission of such RFC for
   publication, and acknowledges that a copyright notice acknowledging
   the IETF Trust's ownership of the copyright in such RFC will be
   included in the published RFC.

12.2.16.  Contributors' Retention of Rights

   Although Contributors provide specific rights to the IETF, it is not
   intended that this should deprive them of their right to exploit
   their Contributions.  To underscore this principle, the IETF Trust is
   directed to issue a license or assurance to Contributors, which
   confirms that they may each make use of their Contributions as
   published in an RFC in any way they wish, subject only to the
   restriction that no Contributor has the right to represent any
   document as an RFC, or equivalent of an RFC, if it is not a full and
   complete copy or translation of the published RFC.

12.3.  Legends, Notices and Other Standardized Text in IETF Documents

   The IETF requires that certain standardized text be reproduced
   verbatim in certain IETF Documents (including copies, derivative
   works, and translations of IETF Documents).  Some of this
   standardized text may be mandatory (e.g., copyright notices and
   disclaimers that must be included in all RFCs) and some may be
   optional (e.g., limitations on the right to make derivative works).
   The text itself, as well as the rules that explain when and how it
   must be used, is contained in the Legend Instructions.  The Legend
   Instructions may be updated from time to time, and the version of the
   standardized text that must be included in IETF Documents is that
   which was posted in the Legend Instructions on the date of
   publication.

   The IETF reserves the right to refuse to publish Contributions that
   do not include the legends and notices required by the Legend
   Instructions.

   It is important to note that each Contributor grants the IETF Trust
   rights pursuant to this document and the policies described herein.
   The legends and notices included in certain written Contributions
   such as Internet-Drafts do not themselves convey any rights.  They
   are simply included to inform the reader (whether or not part of the
   IETF) about certain legal rights and limitations associated with such
   documents.

   It is also important to note that additional copyright notices are
   not permitted in IETF Documents except in the case where such
   document is the product of a joint development effort between the
   IETF and another standards development organization or is a
   republication of the work of another standards development
   organization.  Such exceptions must be approved on an individual
   basis by the IAB.

13.  Security Considerations

   Security issues are not discussed in this memo.

14.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no IANA actions.

15.  Change Log

   *  Draft 0: Translated the nroff source of RFC 2026 into markdown.
      The notices in the document at section 12.4 were prefaced with
      "THIS TEXT ADDED TO PASS THE IDNITS CHECKS" so that the draft
      could be published.  The copyright notice is changed to the
      current one.  Because of this and other boilerplate, some section
      numbers differ from the original RFC.

   *  Draft 1: Add Scott Bradner as co-author.  Add Note.  Alphabetize
      terminology.  Minor wording tweaks.

   *  Draft 2: Clarified Note about the RFC's.  More word tweaks.
      Remove bulk of text from the Notices, and point to RFC 2026, to
      avoid confusion and pass the idnits checks.

   *  Draft 3: Incorporated RFC 5378.

   *  Draft 4: Updated terminology and removed some obvious or old
      terms.  In some cases this meant minor editorial changes in the
      body text.

   *  Draft 5: Add text about 5657 and errata to the intro Note.
      Incorporate RFC 5742.

16.  References

16.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2119>.

   [RFC5377]  Halpern, J., Ed., "Advice to the Trustees of the IETF
              Trust on Rights to Be Granted in IETF Documents",
              RFC 5377, DOI 10.17487/RFC5377, November 2008,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc5377>.

   [RFC7322]  Flanagan, H. and S. Ginoza, "RFC Style Guide", RFC 7322,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC7322, September 2014,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7322>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8174>.

   [RFC9281]  Salz, R., "Entities Involved in the IETF Standards
              Process", BCP 11, RFC 9281, DOI 10.17487/RFC9281, June
              2022, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9281>.

16.2.  Informative References

   [BERNE]    "Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and
              Artistic Work", n.d.,
              <https://www.wipo.int/treaties/en/ip/berne>.

   [RFC1311]  Postel, J., "Introduction to the STD Notes", RFC 1311,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC1311, March 1992,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc1311>.

   [RFC2026]  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision
              3", BCP 9, RFC 2026, DOI 10.17487/RFC2026, October 1996,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2026>.

   [RFC4844]  Daigle, L., Ed. and IAB, "The RFC Series and RFC Editor",
              RFC 4844, DOI 10.17487/RFC4844, July 2007,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc4844>.

   [RFC5657]  Dusseault, L. and R. Sparks, "Guidance on Interoperation
              and Implementation Reports for Advancement to Draft
              Standard", BCP 9, RFC 5657, DOI 10.17487/RFC5657,
              September 2009, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc5657>.

   [RFC5742]  Alvestrand, H. and R. Housley, "IESG Procedures for
              Handling of Independent and IRTF Stream Submissions",
              BCP 92, RFC 5742, DOI 10.17487/RFC5742, December 2009,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc5742>.

   [RFC8179]  Bradner, S. and J. Contreras, "Intellectual Property
              Rights in IETF Technology", BCP 79, RFC 8179,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8179, May 2017,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8179>.

   [STDIDX]   "STD INDEX", n.d.,
              <https://www.ietf.org/rfc/std-index.txt>.  Note that STD1
              is no longer published.

   [US-ASCII] ANSI, "Coded Character Set -- 7-Bit American Standard Code
              for Information Interchange", March 1986.  ANSI X3.4-1986

Acknowledgments

   We gratefully acknowledge those who have contributed to the
   development of IETF RFC's and the processes that create both the
   content and documents.  In particular, we thank the authors of all
   the documents that updated [RFC2026].

   We also thank Sandy Ginoza of the Secretariat for sending all the
   original RFC sources.

Authors' Addresses

   Rich Salz
   Akamai Technologies
   Email: rsalz@akamai.com


   Scott Bradner
   SOBCO
   Email: sob@sobco.com
